white sky, black sky, and blue sky albedo for land surfaces, it has been shown that the albedo at particular solar zenith angle can be approximated by the proportionate sum of two terms: the directional hemispherical reflectance at that solar zenith angle, sometimes referred to as black sky albedo, and the bi hemispherical reflectance, sometimes referred to as white sky albedo. with being the proportion of direct radiation from given solar angle, and being the proportion of diffuse illumination, the actual albedo (also called blue sky albedo) can then be given as: this formula is important because it allows the albedo to be calculated for any given illumination conditions from knowledge of the intrinsic properties of the surface. examples of terrestrial albedo effects illumination albedo is not directly dependent on illumination because changing the amount of incoming light proportionally changes the amount of reflected light, except in circumstances where change in illumination induces change in the earth surface at that location (e.g. through melting of reflective ice). that said, albedo and illumination both vary by latitude. albedo is highest near the poles and lowest in the subtropics, with local maximum in the tropics. insolation effects the intensity of albedo temperature effects depends on the amount of albedo and the level of local insolation (solar irradiance); high albedo areas in the arctic and antarctic regions are cold due to low insolation, whereas areas such as the sahara desert, which also have relatively high albedo, will be hotter due to high insolation. tropical and sub tropical rainforest areas have low albedo, and are much hotter than their temperate forest counterparts, which have lower insolation. because insolation plays such big role in the heating and cooling effects of albedo, high insolation areas like the tropics will tend to show more pronounced fluctuation in local temperature when local albedo changes. arctic regions notably release more heat back into space than what they absorb, effectively cooling the earth. this has been concern since arctic ice and snow has been melting at higher rates due to higher temperatures, creating regions in the arctic that are notably darker (being water or ground which is darker color) and reflects less heat back into space. this feedback loop results in reduced albedo effect. climate and weather albedo affects climate by determining how much radiation planet absorbs. the uneven heating of earth from albedo variations between land, ice, or ocean surfaces can drive weather. albedo temperature feedback when an area albedo changes due to snowfall, snow temperature feedback results. layer of snowfall increases local albedo, reflecting away sunlight, leading to local cooling. in principle, if no outside temperature change affects this area (e.g., warm air mass), the raised albedo and lower temperature would maintain the current snow and invite further snowfall, deepening the snow temperature feedback. however, because local weather is dynamic due to the change of seasons, eventually warm air masses and more direct angle of sunlight (higher insolation) cause melting. when the melted area reveals surfaces with lower albedo, such as grass, soil, or ocean, the effect is reversed: the darkening surface lowers albedo, increasing local temperatures, which induces more melting and thus reducing the albedo further, resulting in still more heating. snow snow albedo is highly variable, ranging from as high as 0.9 for freshly fallen snow, to about 0.4 for melting snow, and as low as 0.2 for dirty snow. over antarctica snow albedo averages little more than 0.8. if marginally snow covered area warms, snow tends to melt, lowering the albedo, and hence leading to more snowmelt because more radiation is being absorbed by the snowpack (the ice albedo positive feedback). just as fresh snow has higher albedo than does dirty snow, the albedo of snow covered sea ice is far higher than that of sea water. sea water absorbs more solar radiation than would the same surface covered with reflective snow. when sea ice melts, either due to rise in sea temperature or in response to increased solar radiation from above, the snow covered surface is reduced, and more surface of sea water is exposed, so the rate of energy absorption increases. the extra absorbed energy heats the sea water, which in turn increases the rate at which sea ice melts. as with the preceding example of snowmelt, the process of melting of sea ice is thus another example of positive feedback. both positive feedback loops have long been recognized as important for global warming. cryoconite, powdery windblown dust containing soot, sometimes reduces albedo on glaciers and ice sheets. the dynamical nature of albedo in response to positive feedback, together with the effects of small errors in the measurement of albedo, can lead to large errors in energy estimates. because of this, in order to reduce the error of energy estimates, it is important to measure the albedo of snow covered areas through remote sensing techniques rather than applying single value for albedo over broad regions. small scale effects albedo works on smaller scale, too. in sunlight, dark clothes absorb more heat and light coloured clothes reflect it better, thus allowing some control over body temperature by exploiting the albedo effect of the colour of external clothing. solar photovoltaic effects albedo can affect the electrical energy output of solar photovoltaic devices. for example, the effects of spectrally responsive albedo are illustrated by the differences between the spectrally weighted albedo of solar photovoltaic technology based on hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a si:h) and crystalline silicon (c si) based compared to traditional spectral integrated albedo predictions. research showed impacts of over 10 for vertically (90 mounted systems, but such effects were substantially lower for systems with lower surface tilts. spectral albedo strongly affects the performance of bifacial solar cells where rear surface performance gains of over 20 have been observed for si cells installed above healthy vegetation. an analysis on the bias due to the specular reflectivity of 22 commonly occurring surface materials (both human made and natural) provided effective albedo values for simulating the performance of seven photovoltaic materials mounted on three common photovoltaic system topologies: industrial (solar farms), commercial flat rooftops and residential pitched roof applications. trees forests generally have low albedo because the majority of the ultraviolet and visible spectrum is absorbed through photosynthesis. for this reason, the greater heat absorption by trees could offset some of the carbon benefits of afforestation (or offset the negative climate impacts of deforestation). in other words: the climate change mitigation effect of carbon sequestration by forests is partially counterbalanced in that reforestation can decrease the reflection of sunlight (albedo). in the case of evergreen forests with seasonal snow cover albedo reduction may be great enough for deforestation to cause net cooling effect. trees also impact climate in extremely complicated ways through the water vapor causes cooling on the land surface, causes heating where it condenses, acts strong greenhouse gas, and can increase albedo when it condenses into clouds. scientists generally treat as net cooling impact, and the net climate impact of albedo and changes from deforestation depends greatly on local climate. mid to high latitude forests have much lower albedo during snow seasons than flat ground, thus contributing to warming. modeling that compares the effects of albedo differences between forests and grasslands suggests that expanding the land area of forests in temperate zones offers only temporary mitigation benefit. in seasonally snow covered zones, winter albedos of treeless areas are 10 to 50 higher than nearby forested areas because snow does not cover the trees as readily. deciduous trees have an albedo value of about 0.15 to 0.18 whereas coniferous trees have value of about 0.09 to 0.15. variation in summer albedo across both forest types is associated with maximum rates of photosynthesis because plants with high growth capacity display greater fraction of their foliage for direct interception of incoming radiation in the upper canopy. the result is that wavelengths of light not used in photosynthesis are more likely to be reflected back to space rather than being absorbed by other surfaces lower in the canopy. studies by the hadley centre have investigated the relative (generally warming) effect of albedo change and (cooling) effect of carbon sequestration on planting forests. they found that new forests in tropical and midlatitude areas tended to cool; new forests in high latitudes (e.g., siberia) were neutral or perhaps warming. water reflectivity of smooth water at (refractive index 1.333) water reflects light very differently from typical terrestrial materials. the reflectivity of water surface is calculated using the fresnel equations. at the scale of the wavelength of light even wavy water is always smooth so the light is reflected in locally specular manner (not diffusely). the glint of light off water is commonplace effect of this. at small angles of incident light, waviness results in reduced reflectivity because of the steepness of the reflectivity vs. incident angle curve and locally increased average incident angle. although the reflectivity of water is very low at low and medium angles of incident light, it becomes very high at high angles of incident light such as those that occur on the illuminated side of earth near the terminator (early morning, late afternoon, and near the poles). however, as mentioned above, waviness causes an appreciable reduction. because light specularly reflected from water does not usually reach the viewer, water is usually considered to have very low albedo in spite of its high reflectivity at high angles of incident light. note that white caps on waves look white (and have high albedo) because the water is foamed up, so there are many superimposed bubble surfaces which reflect, adding up their reflectivities. fresh black ice exhibits fresnel reflection. snow on top of this sea ice increases the albedo to 0.9. clouds cloud albedo has substantial influence over atmospheric temperatures. different types of clouds exhibit different reflectivity, theoretically ranging in albedo from minimum of near to maximum approaching 0.8. "on any given day, about half of earth is covered by clouds, which reflect more sunlight than land and water. clouds keep earth cool by reflecting sunlight, but they can also serve as blankets to trap warmth." albedo and climate in some areas are affected by artificial clouds, such as those created by the contrails of heavy commercial airliner traffic. study following the burning of the kuwaiti oil fields during iraqi occupation showed that temperatures under the burning oil fires were as much as colder than temperatures several miles away under clear skies. aerosol effects aerosols (very fine particles droplets in the atmosphere) have both direct and indirect effects on earth radiative balance. the direct (albedo) effect is generally to cool the planet; the indirect effect (the particles act as cloud condensation nuclei and thereby change cloud properties) is less certain. as per spracklen et al. the effects are: aerosol direct effect. aerosols directly scatter and absorb radiation. the scattering of radiation causes atmospheric cooling, whereas absorption can cause atmospheric warming. in the 1966 penguin books edition of the moonstone j. i. m. stewart states that collins used g. c. king the natural history, ancient and modern, of precious stones ... (1865) to research the history of the koh noor.
