model 1: I returned and saw under the sun that the race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of
understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill; but time and chance hap- peneth to them
all. For man also knoweth not his time: as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as
the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men snared in an evil time,
when it falleth suddenly upon them. This wisdom have I seen also under the sun, and it
seemed great unto me. There was a little city, and few men within it; and there came a
great king against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it. Now there was
found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man
remembered that same poor man. - Ecclesiastes, IX, II-18, King James Version, 1611.)

model 2: The dominant spirit, however, that haunts this enchanted region and seems to
be commander-in-chief of all powers of the air, is the apparition of a figure on horseback
without a head. It is said by some to be the ghost of a Hessian trooper, whose head had
been carried away by a cannon-ball, in some nameless battle during the revolutionary
war; and who is ever and anon seen by the country folk, hurrying along in the gloom of
night, as if on the wings of the wind. His haunts are not confined to the valley, but
extend at times to the adjacent roads, and especially to the vicinity of a church at no
great distance. Indeed, certain of the most authentic historians of those parts, who have
been careful in collecting and collating the floating facts concerning this spectre, allege
that the body of the trooper having been buried in the churchyard, the ghost rides forth
to the scene of battle in nightly quest of his head; and that the rushing speed with which
he some- times passes along the Hollow, like a midnight blast, is owing to his being
belated and in a hurry to get back to the churchyard before daybreak. – Washington
Irving, "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow," The Sketch-Book, 1819-20

model 3: There is a time in every man's education when he arrives at the conviction
that envy is ignorance; that imitation is suicide; that he must take himself for better for
worse as his portion; that though the wide universe is full of good, no kernel of
nourishing corn can come to him but through his toil bestowed on that plot of ground
which is given to him to till. That power which resides in him is new in nature, and none
but he knows what that is which he can do, nor does he know until he has tried. Not for
nothing one face, one character, one fact, makes much impression on him and another
none. This sculpture in the memory is not without pre-established harmony. The eye
was placed where one ray should fall, that it might testify of that particular ray. We but
half express ourselves, and are ashamed of that divine idea which each of us
represents. It may be safely trusted as proportionate and of good issues, so it be
faithfully imparted, but God will not have his work made manifest by cowards. A man is
relieved and gay when he has put his heart into his work and done his best; but what he
has said or done otherwise shall give him no peace. It is a deliverance which does not
deliver. In the attempt his genius deserts him; no muse befriends; no invention, no hope.
– Ralph Waldo Emerson, "Self-Reliance," 1841

model 4: The critical power is of lower rank than the creative. True; but in assenting to
this proposition, one or two things are to be kept in mind. It is undeniable that the
exercise of a creative power, that a free creative activity, is the highest function of man;
it is so by man's finding in it his true happiness. But it is undeniable, also, that men may
have the sense of exercising this free creative activity in other ways than in pro- ducing
great works of literature or art; if it were not so, all but a very few men would be shut out
from the true happiness of all men. They may have it in well-doing, they may have it in
learning, they may have it even in criticising. This is one thing to be kept in mind.
Another is that the exercise of the creative power in the production of great works of
literature or art, however high this exercise of it may rank, is not at all epochs and under
all conditions possible; and that therefore labour may be vainly spent in attempting it,
which might with more fruit be used in preparing for it, in rendering it possible. This
creative power works with elements, with materials; what if it has not those materials,
those elements, ready for its use? In that case, it must surely wait till they art ready. -
Matthew Arnold, "The Function of Criticism at the Present Time," Essays in
Criticism,First Series, 1865.

model 5: It seems to me that it was far from right for the Professor of English in Yale, the
Professor of English Literature in Columbia, and Wilkie Collins to deliver opinions on
Cooper's literature without having read some of it. It would have been much more
decorous to keep silent and let persons talk who have read Cooper.
Cooper's art has some defects. In one place in Deerslayer, and in the restricted
space of two-thirds of a page, Cooper has scored 114 offenses against literary art out of
a possible 115. It breaks the record. There are nineteen rules governing literary art in
the domain of romantic fiction--some say twenty-two. In Deerslayer Cooper violated
eighteen of them. These eighteen require:
1. That a tale shall accomplishsomething and arrive somewhere. But the
Deerslayer tale accomplishesnothing and arrives in the air.
2. They require that the episodes of a tale shall be necessary parts of the tale
and shall help to develop it. But as the Deerslayer tale is not a tale, and
accomplishes nothing and arrives nowhere, the episodes have no rightful
place in the work, since there was nothing for them to develop.
3. They require that the personages in a tale shall be alive, except in the case of
corpses, and that always the reader shall be able to tell the corpses from the
others. But this detail has often been overlooked in the Deerslayer tale....
- Mark Twain, "Fenimore Cooper'sLiterary Offenses,"1895