the result of present observation of the thermal radio emission of the moon be consistent with the very low thermal conductivity of the surface layer which be derive from the variation in the infrared emission during eclipse ( e.g. , Garstung , 1958 ) .
when sufficiently accurate and complete measurement be available , it will be possible to set limit on the thermal and electrical characteristic of the surface and subsurface material of the moon .
the observed intensity of the radio emission of Venus be much high than the expect thermal intensity , although the spectrum indicate by measurement at wave length near 3 cm and 10 cm be like that of a black body at about 600 - degree .
this result suggest a very high temperature at the solid surface of the planet , although there be the possibility that the observed radiation may be a combination of both thermal and non - thermal component and that the observed spectrum be that of a black body merely by coincidence .
this result suggest a very high temperature at the solid surface of the planet , although there be the possibility that the observed radiation may be a combination of both thermal and non - thermal component and that the observed spectrum be that of a black body merely by coincidence .
for the case of Jupiter , the radio emission spectrum be definitely not like the spectrum of a black - body radiator , and it seem very likely that the radiation reach the earth be a combination of thermal radiation from the atmosphere and non - thermal component .
for the case of Jupiter , the radio emission spectrum be definitely not like the spectrum of a black - body radiator , and it seem very likely that the radiation reach the earth be a combination of thermal radiation from the atmosphere and non - thermal component .
of the remain planet , only Mars and Saturn have be observe as radio source , and not very much information be available .
Mars have be observe twice at about 3 - cm wave length , and the intensity of the observed radiation be in reasonable agreement with the thermal radiation which might be predict on the basis of the know temperature of Mars .
that the amplitude of the variation be considerably less than the amplitude of the variation in the infrared emission as measure by Pettit and Nicholson ( 1930 ) and Pettit ( 1935 ) ; ;
Piddington and Minnett explain their observation by point out that rocklike material which be likely to make up the surface of the moon would be partially transparent to radio wave , although opaque to infrared radiation .
the observable characteristic of planetary radio radiation be the intensity , the polarization , and the direction of arrival of the wave .
the maximum angular diameter of any planetary disk as observe from the earth be about 1 minute of arc .
the apparent black - body disk temperature be the temperature which must be assume for the black body in order that the intensity of its radiation should equal that of the observed radiation .
the radio radiation of the sun which be reflect from the moon and planet should be negligible compare with their thermal emission at centimeter wave length , except possibly at time of exceptional outburst of solar radio noise .
in the observation at 4.3 mm ( Coates , 1959 ) , the diameter of the antenna beam , 6'.7 , be small enough to allow resolution of some of the large feature of the lunar surface , and contour diagram have be make of the lunar brightness distribution at three lunar phase .
the constant - temperature contour be much smooth than those observe at 4.3 mm by Coates ( 1959 ) and apparently the emission at 8 mm be not nearly so sensitive to difference in surface feature .
the constant - temperature contour be much smooth than those observe at 4.3 mm by Coates ( 1959 ) and apparently the emission at 8 mm be not nearly so sensitive to difference in surface feature .
the half - intensity diameter of the antenna beam be about 9 ' , and the angle subtend by the moon include the entire main beam and part of the first side lobe .
the ratio of the measured antenna temperature change during a drift scan across the moon to the average brightness temperature of the moon over the antenna beam ( assume that the brightness temperature of the sky be negligible ) be find , by graphical integration of the antenna directivity diagram , to be 0.85 .
the measured brightness temperature be a good approximation to the brightness temperature at the center of the lunar disk because of the narrow antenna beam and because the temperature distribution over the central portion of the moon 's disk be nearly uniform .
the measured brightness temperature be a good approximation to the brightness temperature at the center of the lunar disk because of the narrow antenna beam and because the temperature distribution over the central portion of the moon 's disk be nearly uniform .
the result of the observation be Af where the phase angle , Q , be measure in degree from new moon and the probable error include absolute as well as relative error .
the variation in the 3 - cm emission of the moon during a lunation be very much less than the variation in the 8.6 - mm emission , as would be expect from the explanation of Piddington and Minnett ( 1949 ) .
the age of the moon be about 2 day .
the half - intensity diameter of the main lobe of the antenna be about 18'.5 , and the brightness temperature be reduce by assume a gaussian shape for the antenna beam and a uniformly bright disk for the moon .
the cool requirement be particularly severe at the anode .
the heat transfer to the anode be due to the follow effect : 1 .
the pressure gradient produce the jet be due to the nature of the magnetic field in the arc ( rapid decrease of current density from cathode to the anode ) .
it be apparent from the above and from experimental evidence that the cool requirement for the anode of free burning arc be large compare with those for the cathode .
however , the anode be still the part receive the large heat flux .
the third method be , to our knowledge , successfully apply for the first time by C. Sheer and co - worker ( Ref . 2 ) .
the purpose of the present study be to study the thermal condition and to establish an energy balance for a transpiration cool anode as well as the effect of blow on the arc voltage .
the anode material be porous graphite .
the graphite be National Carbon NC 60 , which have a porosity of 50 % and an average pore size of 30 .
in this design the anode holder be water cool and the heat loss by conduction from the anode be determine by measure the temperature rise of the coolant .
the power source be a commercial D. C. rectifier .
at 100 Amp the 360 cycle ripple be less than 0.5 v ( peak to peak ) with a resistive load .
the heat loss of the holder be to be reduce as far as possible and they should be such that an accurate heat balance can be make .
the upstream gas temperature measure with the thermocouple show in figure 2 be Af .
the reflection of radiation originate from the anode holder and reflect back to it by the surround metal surface should also be small because of the peculiar characteristic of the metal surface and of the specific geometry .
the total heat flux from the porous plug into the plug holder be thereby Af .
the instrument use for this work be a slight modification of that previously describe .
although the tape be run for over 1 hr . , a steady state be not reach , and it be conclude that the reason for this be that the back pressure of the manometer be build up from the material feed from between the block and this be available at a very slow rate .
a system have to be use which do not depend upon the feeding of the fluid into the manometer if measurement of the normal pressure be to be make in a reasonable time .
the actual pressure be not determined because the pressure be beyond the upper limit of the apparatus on hand .
the two fluid which give the small negative pressure be polybutene with molecular weight which be state to be 520 and 300 .
the maximum suction be 3.25 '' '' of test fluid measure from the top of the block , and steady state be apparently reach with these fluid .
such an instrument would be useful for the characterization of many commercial material as well as theoretical study .
the elasticity be a parameter of fluid which be not subject to simple measurement at present , and it be a parameter which be probably vary in an unknown manner with many commercial material .
if the volume be the molal volume , then Af be obtain on a molal basis which be the customary terminology of the chemist .
although the Af calculation be obvious by analogy with that for gravitational field and osmotic pressure , it be interesting to confirm it by a method which can be generalize to include related effect .
if Af be the change per unit volume in Gibbs function cause by the shear field at constant p and T , and * * yr be the density of the fluid , then the total potential energy of the system above the reference height be Af .
the total volume of the system above the reference height be Af , and H can be eliminate to obtain an equation for the total potential energy of the system in term of H .
there be one exception to the above statement as have be point out , and that be that fluid can relax by flow into field of low rate of shear , so the statement should be modify by state that the mechanic be similar .
if the mechanic be similar , we can also infer that the thermodynamic will also be similar .
if the mechanic be similar , we can also infer that the thermodynamic will also be similar .
the concept of the strain energy as a Gibbs function difference Af and exert a force normal to the shearing face be compatible with the information obtain from optical birefringence study of fluid undergo shear .
essentially these birefringence study show that at low rate of shear a tension be present at 45 - degree to the direction of shear , and as the rate of shear increase , the direction of the maximum tension move asymptotically toward the direction of shear .
if they be not ellipsoid , the conclusion will be a reasonable approximation .
Mason and Taylor both show that the major axis of the ellipsoid be at 45 - degree at low rate of shear and that it approach the direction of shear with increase rate of shear .
the relative force can be calculate from the various radius of curvature if we assume : ( a ) the surface tension be uniform on the surface of the drop .
( b ) that because of the low viscosity of the fluid , the internal pressure be the same in all direction .
( c ) the kinetic effect be negligible .
just as the pressure exert by surface tension in a spherical drop be Af and the pressure exert by surface tension on a cylindrical shape be Af , the pressure exert by any curve surface be Af , where * * yg be the interfacial tension and Af and Af be the two radius of curvature .
just as the pressure exert by surface tension in a spherical drop be Af and the pressure exert by surface tension on a cylindrical shape be Af , the pressure exert by any curve surface be Af , where * * yg be the interfacial tension and Af and Af be the two radius of curvature .
just as the pressure exert by surface tension in a spherical drop be Af and the pressure exert by surface tension on a cylindrical shape be Af , the pressure exert by any curve surface be Af , where * * yg be the interfacial tension and Af and Af be the two radius of curvature .
if a be the major axis of an ellipsoid and B and c be the other two axis , the radius of curvature in the ab plane at the end of the axis Af , and the difference in pressure along the A and b axis be Af .
this viscosity of the material in the drop be , of course , not negligible .
its value be Af from the above datum .
this conformational entropy be , in this case , equal to the usual entropy , for there be no other change or other energy involve .
the line be asymmetric and over the range of field Af gauss and temperature Af the asymmetry increase with increase Af and decrease t .
Af appear to be well suited for the study of these matter , since it be a normal paramagnet , with three unpaired electron on the chromium , its crystal structure be very simple , and the unknown position of the hydrogen in the strong Af bond provide structural interest .
we then outline the theory of the interaction of paramagnetic dipole with nucleus and show that the theory be in excellent agreement with experiment .
theoretical study of the hydrogen bond generally agree that the Af bond will be linear in the absence of peculiarity of pack in the solid .
there be ample evidence from many source that the Af bond in Af be symmetric .
the Af distance in Af be 2.26 Aj .
there be evidence , though less convincing than for Af , that the Af bond in nickel dimethylglyoxime be symmetric .
here the Af distance be 2.44 Aj .
a number of semiempirical estimate by various worker lead to the conclusion that the Af bond become symmetric when the Af bond length be about 2.4 to 2.5 A , but aside from the possible example of nickel dimethylglyoxime there have be no convincing report of symmetric Af bond .
there be , then , the possibility that this Af bond be symmetric , although Douglass be unable to determine its symmetry from his x - ray datum .
under this assumption the space group must be Af and the follow be the position of the atom in the unit cell .
this space group require the hydrogen bond to be symmetric .
the o atom in each sheet be close pack and each Cr atom be surround by a distorted octahedron of o atom .
the Af layer be stack normal to the ( 111 ) axis with the low oxygen of one layer directly above the upper oxygen of the neighboring low layer , in such a manner that the repeat be every three layer .
a drawing of the structure be to be find in reference 6 .
the bond angle and distance be all within the expect limit and the volume per oxygen be about normal .
hence it be difficult to conceive of a packing of the atom in this material in which the oxygen atom be far from geometrical equivalence .
the only effect of lack of a center would then be to release the hydrogen atom to occupy general , rather than special , position along the ( 111 ) axis .
if the Af bond be linear then there be three reasonable position for the hydrogen atom : ( 1 ) the hydrogen atom be center and hence all lie on a sheet midway between the oxygen sheet ; ;
( 2 ) all hydrogen atom lie on a sheet , but the sheet be close to one oxygen sheet than to the other ; ;
( 3 ) hydrogen atom be asymmetrically place , either randomly or in an ordered way , so that some hydrogen atom be close to the upper oxygen atom while other be close to the low oxygen atom .
( 3 ) hydrogen atom be asymmetrically place , either randomly or in an ordered way , so that some hydrogen atom be close to the upper oxygen atom while other be close to the low oxygen atom .
a randomization of ` ` up '' and ` ` down '' be more likely than order ` ` up '' and ` ` down '' in position ( 3 ) since the hydrogen atom be well separate and so the position of one could hardly affect the position of another , and also since order ` ` up '' and ` ` down '' imply a large unit cell , for which no evidence exist .
a randomization of ` ` up '' and ` ` down '' be more likely than order ` ` up '' and ` ` down '' in position ( 3 ) since the hydrogen atom be well separate and so the position of one could hardly affect the position of another , and also since order ` ` up '' and ` ` down '' imply a large unit cell , for which no evidence exist .
since Af be ferromagnetic , we feel that any result obtain from the magnetically contaminated Af would be suspect .
this latter reaction be in accord with the report decomposition of Af .
for exactly three unpaired electron the coefficient would be 3.10 .
the particle appear rough and undoubtedly the single - crystal domain be small than this .
the x - ray datum be consistent with particle size of 1000 A or great .
the value derive be 16 microsecond .
field shift be derive from the mean value of the resonance line , define as the field about which the first moment be zero .
the datum report here be either from spectra from which the adsorbed water resonance could easily be eliminate or from spectra of sample evacuate and seal off at 375 - degree - c which contain no adsorbed water .
the measured powder density of the Af use here be about Af , approximately one - third that of the crystal density ( Af ) .
the top of the sample be nearly flat and the bottom hemispherical .
polyphosphate give renew life to soap product at a time when surfactant be a threat though expensive , and these same polyphosphate spell the decline of soap usage when the synergism between polyphosphate and synthetic detergent active be recognize and exploit .
the market today for detergent builder be quite diverse .
the well know field of application for builder be in heavy - duty , spray - dry detergent formulation for household use .
a well - publicize entrant which have achieve success only recently be the build liquid detergent , with which the major problem today be incorporation of builder and active into a small volume use a sufficiently high builder / active ratio .
a well - publicize entrant which have achieve success only recently be the build liquid detergent , with which the major problem today be incorporation of builder and active into a small volume use a sufficiently high builder / active ratio .
cleaning or detergent action be entirely a matter of surface .
exclusive of esthetic value , such as high- or low - foam level , perfume content , etc . , the requirement for the organic active use in washing textile be high .
no matter how they be formulate , a large number of organic active be simply not suitable for this application , since they do not give adequate soil removal .
as be the case with the surface - active agent , the requirement for builder to be use in detergent composition for washing textile be also high .
as be the case with the surface - active agent , the requirement for builder to be use in detergent composition for washing textile be also high .
the problem of hard - surface cleaning be not nearly as complex .
in hard - surface cleaning , the inorganic salt be more important than the organic active .
hydroxide , orthophosphate , borate , carbonate , and silicate be important inorganic ingredient of hard - surface cleaner .
hydroxide , orthophosphate , borate , carbonate , and silicate be important inorganic ingredient of hard - surface cleaner .
the purpose of washing be , obviously , to remove soil which be arbitrarily class in the four major category give below : 1 .
however , a major factor in bind dirt be the attraction between surface that go under the name of Van der Waal 's force .
obviously , if colloidal particle bear charge of opposite sign or , if one kind be charge and the other kind be not , the attraction will be intensify and the tendency to agglomerate will be greatly reinforce .
( 1 ) below the critical micelle concentration , monomer and some dimer be present .
it be evident that the requirement impose by these effect upon any one detergent constituent act alone be severe .
the thermal exchange of chlorine between Af and liquid Af be readily measurable at temperature in the range of 180 - degree and above .
-- in study the liquid phase thermal reaction , some 70 tube from 12 different manifold filling be prepare and analyze .
in most case the chlorine concentration be about Af .
the liquid phase photochemical exchange between chlorine and carbon tetrachloride be more reproducible than the thermal exchange , although still erratic .
the improvement be most noticeable in the great consistency among reaction cell prepare as a group on the same manifold .
these estimate indicate that the quantum yield for the exchange of chlorine with liquid carbon tetrachloride at 65 - degree be of the order of magnitude of unity .
-- although there be some variation in result which must be attribute either to trace impurity or to variation in wall effect , the photochemical exchange in the gas phase be sufficiently reproducible so that it seem meaningful to compare the reaction rate in different series of reaction tube for the purpose of obtain information on the effect of chlorine concentration and of carbon tetrachloride concentration on the reaction rate .
the last column show the rate of exchange that would have be observe at a relative intensity of 4 ( 14.7 cm . distance ) calculate on the assumption that the incident light intensity be inversely proportional to the square of the distance of the lamp from the cell and that the rate be directly proportional to the incident light intensity .
the last column show the rate of exchange that would have be observe at a relative intensity of 4 ( 14.7 cm . distance ) calculate on the assumption that the incident light intensity be inversely proportional to the square of the distance of the lamp from the cell and that the rate be directly proportional to the incident light intensity .
at one astronomical unit from the sun ( the Earth 's distance ) the dust orbit be probably nearly circular .
accord to Whipple ( 1955 ) , cometary debris be sufficient to replenish the material spiral into the sun , maintain a fairly steady state .
beyond a few million kilometer from the Earth , but still in the region of the Earth 's orbit , a prediction of the flux of dust be even more unreliable .
at great distance from the sun , the situation be still less certain .
another important source of evidence only recently receive much attention be the analysis of atmospheric dust for a meteoritic component .
the core of deep - sea sediment and content of collector in remote region be valuable in this category .
the impact rate on 1958 alpha for 153 event be Af for particle of mass great than Af ( Dubin , 1960 ) ; ;
ninety per cent of the 153 record impact occur between midnight and noon , and from day to day the variation of the rate be as much as an order of magnitude .
for the next two day , the impact rate be Af ; ;
and for the next nine day , the impact rate be less than Af ( Nazarova , 1960 ) .
note that the mass threshold be four time that of 1958 Alpha and that the flux be one fifth as large .
note that the mass threshold be four time that of 1958 Alpha and that the flux be one fifth as large .
with detector sensitive to three mass interval and base on a few count , the second and third russian space probe indicate that the flux of the small particle detect be less than that of large one .
be base on so few event , these result be of dubious validity .
the calibration of piezoelectric sensor in term of the particle parameter be very uncertain .
many worker believe that the response be proportional to the incident momentum of the particle , a relation deduce from laboratory result linearly extrapolate to meteoritic velocity .
however , the conversion from mass to size be unreliable , since many photographic meteor give evidence of a fluffy , loosely bind meteorite structure with density as low as Af .
the velocity value use be also open to some question ; ;
zodiacal light and the gegenschein give some evidence for such a dust blanket , a phenomenon also to be expect if the dust before capture be in circular orbit about the sun , as indicate by the trend of the small visible meteor .
the diurnal variation in the observed flux may be partly due to the dependence of the detector sensitivity on the incident velocity .
the flux value be for all particle with masse great than the give mass and be base on an estimate of the number of visual meteor .
it be assume that the flux value increase by a factor of 2.512 per magnitude , in accordance with the opinion that the total mass flux in each unit range in magnitude be constant .
of course , if there be a dust blanket around the Earth , the flux in interplanetary space should be less than the figure give here .
note that the mass scale be one to two order of magnitude great than some previously use ; ;
the approximate equation be Af , where N be the number of Af with electron line - density great than or equal to Af , and Q be proportional to the mass of the meteorite .
these extrapolate flux be about an order of magnitude less than the value from the satellite datum and the figure in Whipple 's table .
the extrapolation may be in error for several reason .
also , it have be suggest that the source of all or part of the dust may not be the same as that for visual or radar meteorite ( Best , 1960 ) , and the same distribution would not be expect .
for all meteorite , the average nickel content be about 2.5 per cent .
biological warfare be the intentional use of live microorganism or their toxic product for the purpose of destroy or reduce the military effectiveness of man .
the major reason for this be that it have no quick - kill effect .
a man can be an effective fighting machine throughout the incubation period of most infectious disease .
an important operational procedure in BW for an enemy would be to create an areosol or cloud of agent over the target area .
the intranasal instillation of a fluid suspension of infectious agent in an anesthetized animal be far different from exposure , through natural respiration , to aerosolize organism .
the natural anatomical and physiological defensive feature of the upper respiratory tract , such as the turbinate of the nose and the cilia of the trachea and large bronchi , be capable of impinge out the large particle to which we be ordinarily expose in our daily existence .
very small particle , however , in a size range of 1 to 4 micron in diameter be capable of pass these impinge barrier and enter the alveolar bed of the lung .
this area be highly susceptible to infection .
for example , bright sunlight be rapidly destructive for live microorganism suspend in air .
certain other property of small particle , in addition to those already mention in connection with penetration of the respiratory tract , be noteworthy in defense consideration .
the secondary consequence from this could be very serious and must be take into consideration in plan for defense .
a satisfactory cloud be produce even though these nozzle be only about 5 per cent efficient in produce an initial cloud in the size range of 1 to 5 micron .
the maximum distance sample be 23 mile from the source .
the dosage in the three level of the vertical profile be : Af
botulinal toxin , for example , be several thousand - fold more toxic by this route than when give per os .
a solid immunity be the one effective circumstance whereby attack by a specific agent can be neutralize .
all of these consideration be of critical importance in consider defense and medical management .
biological agent be , of course , highly host - specific .
some of those who question the value of BW have assume that the only potential would be in the establishment of epidemic .
our major problem be what an enemy might accomplish in an initial attack on a target .
no epidemic be initiate nor be one expect because the population in City A be not lousy .
lousiness be a prerequisite for epidemic typhus .
the same delivery vehicle -- whether they be airplane , submarine or guide missile -- should be usable .
biological agent be , moreover , suitable for delivery through enemy sabotage which impose many problem in defense .
the air conditioning and ventilate system of large building be subject to attack .
this buffer , ph 8.6 , be 0.005 M in Af and 0.039 M in tris(hydroxymethyl)-aminometha ( Tris ) .
when paper electrophoresis be to be use for preparation , eight strip of a whole serum sample or a chromatographic fraction concentrate by negative pressure dialysis be run / chamber under the condition describe above .
chromatography of whole sera reveal that the area of rh antibody activity be generally continuous and wide .
I must add at once that these animal be what we call ` ` queen '' , young female that have mate in the previous summer or autumn .
even some of the queen will die before the winter be over , fall prey to enemy or disease .
the survivor emerge on some nice , sunny day in March or April , when the temperature be close to 50 - degree and there be not too much wind .
now the thing for we to do be to find ourselves a couple of those wonderful flowering currant such as the red Ribes sanguineum of our Pacific Northwest , or otherwise a good sloe tree , or perhaps some nice pussy willow in bloom , preferably one with male or staminate catkin .
the bloom of Ribes and of the willow and sloe be the place where large number of our early insect will assemble : honeybee , bumblebee , and other wild bee , and also various kind of fly .
it be not difficult to see that the stamen of the catkin be always arrange in pair , and that each individual flower be nothing but one such pair stand on a green , black - tip little scale .
the only exception to this be certain bee that have become parasite .
as we have already see in the first chapter , bumblebee be big , hairy , and much more colorful than honeybee , exhibit various combination of black , yellow , white and orange .
as befit a queen , a bumblebee female be rather choosy and may spend considerable time search for a suitable nesting place .
then , a group of egg be deposit in a cavity in the beebread loaf and the egg compartment be close .
the larvae , keep warm by the queen , be full grow in about ten day .
it be an amazing fact that in some specie this will happen while the summer be still in full swing , for instance , in August .
the temperature then be still very high .
the nest itself , the structure that in some case house about 2,000 individual when the season be at its peak , be now rapidly destroy by the scavenging larvae of certain beetle and moth .
the one sure way to tell victim and villain apart be to examine the hind leg which in the case of the idler , Psithyrus , lack the pollen basket -- naturally ! !
the host never seem to recognize that something be amiss , so that the compartment afterward be seal normally .
it be almost certain that some of these , usually a trifle small than the honeybee , be andrenas or mining bee .
almost equal in size to a honeybee , a. armata be much more beautiful in color , at least in the female of the specie : a rich , velvety , rusty red .
the male be much duller .
the development of the Andrena larvae be very rapid , so that by the end of spring they have already pupate and become adult .
its life history be much simple than that of the truly colonial bumblebee and can serve as an example of the life cycle of many other specie .
after all , social life in the group of the bee be by no means general , although it certainly be a striking feature .
the way in which it transport its pollen be not so perfect , either .
closely related to the andrena be the nomia or alkali bee .
often the burrow be only an inch or two apart , and the bee city cover several acre .
the life history of the alkali bee be similar to that of Andrena , but the first activity of the adult do not take place until summer , and the individual hibernate in the prepupal stage .
this may just be pride in my adopt State of Washington , but certainly I love to visit their mound city near Yakima and Prosser in July or August , when the bee be in their most active period .
the thing be that these bee love a fine - grain soil that be moist ; ;
yet the water in the ground should not be stagnant either .
the good chance , of course , be offer by gently slope terrain where the water remain close to the surface and where the air be dry , so that a high evaporation leave salty deposit which permit only sparse plant growth .
Laurence M. Klauber put length at maturity at two third the ultimate length for some rattlesnake , and Charles C. Carpenter 's datum on Michigan garter and ribbon snake ( Thamnophis ) show that the small gravid female be more than half as long as the big adult .
he be work with specie of Java , so perhaps some tropical snake be unusual in this respect .
datum on the former be scanty , but there can be little doubt that the latter be sometimes bear at a length great than that of any of the other , thereby lend support to the belief that the anaconda do , indeed , attain the great length .
for four of the six ( the anaconda and the amethystine python can not be include for lack of datum ) there be also a correlation between size at maturity and maximum length , the boa constrictor be the small and the indian python the next in size at the former stage .
the good way to determine the correct figure ( in captive ) be by direct observation of pair isolate from birth , a method that produce surprising result : mature of a male indian python in less than two year , his mate in less than three ; ;
another approach be to estimate from the rate of growth and the small size at maturity .
oversized monster be never bring home either alive or preserve , and field measurement be obviously open to doubt because of the universal tendency to exaggerate dimension .
measurement of skin be of little value ; ;
every snake hide be noticeably long than its carcass and intentional stretching present no difficulty to the unscrupulous explorer .
the anaconda prove to be the fly in the ointment , but the reason for this be not clear ; ;
the relatively wild condition still find in tropical South America might be responsible .
the argument against this last approach be comparable to that which reject story about hoop snake , about snake that break themselves into many piece and join up again , or even of ghost that chase people out of graveyard ; ;
he reason that as anacondas 30 foot long be often find , some might be 38 , and occasional ` ` monstrous freak '' over 50 .
he conclude that the anaconda 's maximum length be 12 or 13 ( perhaps 14 ) meter , which would approximate from 39 to 42 foot ( 14 meter be slightly less than 46 foot ) .
he conclude that the anaconda 's maximum length be 12 or 13 ( perhaps 14 ) meter , which would approximate from 39 to 42 foot ( 14 meter be slightly less than 46 foot ) .
the range be from 14 to 25 inch ; ;
Alphonse R. Hoge 's measurement of several very young specimen from Brazil suggest that at birth the female be slightly large than the male .
one female , collect on an island off the coast of Nicaragua , be gravid and measure 4 foot 8 inch from snout to vent ( her tail should be between 6 and 7 inch long ) .
one female , collect on an island off the coast of Nicaragua , be gravid and measure 4 foot 8 inch from snout to vent ( her tail should be between 6 and 7 inch long ) .
the female from Central America which give birth to four be only 3 foot 11 inch long .
the result be too varied to allow generalization .
lung type 3 ( ( fig . 3 ) be to some degree a composite of type 1 , and 2 .
the most distal airway be similar to those find in type 1 , , be compose of numerous , apparently true terminal bronchiole and occasional , poorly develop respiratory bronchiole ( fig . 14 , 15 ) .
air - drift from one area to another be , therefore , conceivable .
the diameter of this bronchial artery be much too large for it to be a mere vasa vasorum ( fig . 16 , 23 , 24 ) .
in distal region its diameter would be one - fourth to one - fifth that of the pulmonary artery .
however , the dynamic of airflow , from morphologic consideration alone , may conceivably be different in the monkey than in the horse .
the volume and , perhaps , even the characteristic of bronchial arterial blood flow might be different in the dog than in the horse .
the volume and , perhaps , even the characteristic of bronchial arterial blood flow might be different in the dog than in the horse .
also , interlobular air drift may be all but nonexistent in the cow ; ;
and , in contrast , be present to a relatively immense degree on a segmental basis in the dog where lobule be absent ( Van Allen and Lindskog , ' 31 ) .
one might also wonder if monkey be capable of develop bronchiolitis as we know it in man or the horse .
the only area in which one might find major disagreement in this matter be in regard to the alveolar distribution of the bronchial artery .
although Miller note in 1907 that a difference in the pleural blood supply exist between animal , nowhere in his publish work be it find that he do a comparative study of the intrapulmonary feature of various mammalian lung other than in the dog and cat ( Miller , ' 13 ; ;
the meaning of this variation in distribution of the bronchial artery as find in the horse be not clear .
therefore , an explanation of this alveolar bronchial artery supply might be the nutritive requirement of an increase amount of supportive tissue , not primarily diffuse in nature , in the region of the alveolus .
the possibility that the absence or presence of these shunt be species - dependent be therefore infer .
in addition , a detailed interspecie survey of the incidence of generalized pulmonary emphysema in mammal would be interesting and pertinent .
this be especially so if the dog , cat or monkey be to be use , in view of their marked anatomical difference from man .
finally , it be suggest that in many respect the horse lung may be anatomically more comparable to that of the human than any other presently know specie .
the pleura and interlobular septum be thick in type 1 and 3 .
the pleura be extremely thin in type 2 and septum be absent .
the pleura be extremely thin in type 2 and septum be absent .
true terminal bronchiole comprise the most frequent form take by the distal airway in type 1 and 3 , although small number of poorly develop respiratory bronchiole be present .
in type 3 , this general relationship be maintain peripherally but not centrally where the pulmonary vein follow a more independent path to the hilum as be the case throughout the lung in type 2 .
the Maturity Chart for each sex demonstrate clearly that Onset be a phenomenon of infancy and early childhood whereas completion be a phenomenon of the later portion of adolescence .
although the standard deviation value on which spread of the line be base be relatively large for those center which begin to ossify early ( table 1 ) , there be considerable difference in this value between center have the closely time onset .
such classification may be call ` ` somewhat advanced '' or ` ` somewhat delay '' , as the case may be , reserve ` ` moderate '' for dot upon or close to the mean .
fourth , the two indicator be for the most part widely separate chronologically , with the extensive age gap occur during childhood for all but one growth center .
it may be assume that difference in rating due to selection of growth center from specific region of the body will be small , accord to exist table of onset age and completion age for center throughout the body .
accordingly , maturity level rating by mean of the upper portion and low portion of the Chart , respectively , should be somewhat similar since skeletal Age assessment be dependent upon onset during infancy and upon completion during adolescence .
accordingly , maturity level rating by mean of the upper portion and low portion of the Chart , respectively , should be somewhat similar since skeletal Age assessment be dependent upon onset during infancy and upon completion during adolescence .
it be state early that one purpose of this study be to extend the analysis of variability of Onset and Completion in each of the 21 growth center somewhat beyond that provide by the datum in Tables 1 and 2 .
when the ` ` dot '' and ` ` tip '' coincide , the classification use in this paper be ` ` same schedule '' .
when the ` ` dot '' and ` ` tip '' coincide , the classification use in this paper be ` ` same schedule '' .
figure 5 and 6 be example of our method of analyze the result for each growth center .
the follow summary , base on Figures 5 and 6 , be an example of one way of interpret the 42 figure construct from onset age and completion age of individual child with respect to the appropriate mean age for each growth center .
the mean onset age be 25.3 month ( table 1 ) , and the average Span of the osseous stage be 133 month .
the correlation ( table 2 ) between onset age and completion age be -.50 , and that between onset age and Span be -.10 .
it be of interest that her menarche be somewhat later than the average for the girl in this group .
the precise mechanism for organification of iodine in the thyroid be not as yet completely understand .
in the absence of addition to the homogenate , the product form be an iodinated particulate protein ( Fawcett and Kirkwood , 1953 ; ;
iodination of tyrosine , however , be not enough for the synthesis of hormone .
there be so far no evidence to indicate conclusively that this coupling be under enzymatic control .
since the circulate thyroid hormone be the amino acid thyroxine and tri - iodothyronine ( cf . section C ) , it be clear that some mechanism must exist in the thyroid gland for their release from protein before secretion .
the finding that the concentration of one of these protease be increase in thyroid gland from TSH - treat animal suggest that this protease may be active in vivo .
this de - iodinating enzyme be effective against mono- and di - iodotyrosine , but do not de - iodinate thyroxine or tri - iodothyronine .
antithyroid drug be of two general type .
the most conclusively identify be l-5 - vinyl-2 - thio - oxazolidone , which be isolate from rutabaga ( Greer , 1950 ) .
there it seem that the goitrogen ingest by dairy animal be itself inactive but be convert in the animal to an active goitrogen , which be then secrete in the milk .
in man the normal level of iodine in the diet and the level necessary to prevent development of goitre be about 100 * * ymg per day .
in man the normal level of iodine in the diet and the level necessary to prevent development of goitre be about 100 * * ymg per day .
far , the gland be able to re - use a large fraction of the thyroid hormone de - iodinate peripherally .
Albert ( 1949 ) have conclude that the most active preparation of TSH make during this period , from 1931 to 1945 , be probably about 100 to 300 time as potent as the starting material .
second , what be its concentration in normal circumstance and in what circumstance will this concentration depart from the normal level and in which direction ? ?
it be therefore necessary to consider the property of pituitary TSH if the fragmentary chemical information about blood TSH be to be discuss rationally .
the international unit be equipotent with the USP unit adopt in 1952 , which be define as the amount of activity present in 20 mg of the USP reference substance .
the case describe in this paper be that of an old man who develop disable muscular weakness while receive a variety of steroid for a refractory anemia .
this patient be a 65 - year - old white male accountant who enter the New York Hospital for his fourth and terminal admission on June 26 , 1959 , because of disable weakness and general debility .
no additional transfusion be necessary after the institution of prednisone in July , 1957 , in an initial dose of 40 mg . daily with gradual tapering to 10 mg . daily .
the hemoglobin be 11.6 gm . .
the hemoglobin be 10.6 gm . .
by Nov. 8 , 1958 , weakness , specifically involve the pelvic and thigh musculature , be pronounce , and a common complaint be ` ` difficulty in step up on to curb '' .
serum potassium at this time be 3.8 meq . per liter , and the hemoglobin be 13.9 gm . by Dec. 1 , 1958 , the weakness in the pelvic and quadricep muscle group be appreciably bad , and it become difficult for the patient to rise unaided from a sit or reclining position .
serum potassium at this time be 3.8 meq . per liter , and the hemoglobin be 13.9 gm . by Dec. 1 , 1958 , the weakness in the pelvic and quadricep muscle group be appreciably bad , and it become difficult for the patient to rise unaided from a sit or reclining position .
serum potassium at this time be 3.8 meq . per liter , and the hemoglobin be 13.9 gm . by Dec. 1 , 1958 , the weakness in the pelvic and quadricep muscle group be appreciably bad , and it become difficult for the patient to rise unaided from a sit or reclining position .
the protein - bind iodine be 6.6 mg . , and the radioactive iodine uptake over the thyroid gland be 46 % in 24 hour , with a conversion ratio of 12 % .
the protein - bind iodine be 6.6 mg . , and the radioactive iodine uptake over the thyroid gland be 46 % in 24 hour , with a conversion ratio of 12 % .
the clinical impression at this time be either muscular dystrophy or polymyositis .
repeat attempt to withdraw steroid entirely be unsuccessful because increase muscle weakness result , as well as fever , malaise , anorexia , anxiety , and an exacerbation of the anemia .
the body be that of a well - develop , somewhat debilitate white man weigh 108 lb . .
there be bilateral pterygia and arcus senili , and the mouth be edentulous .
the coronary artery be sclerotic and diffusely narrow throughout their course , and the right coronary artery be virtually occlude by a yellow atheromatous plaque 1.5 cm . distal to its origin .
the valve be normal except for thin yellow plaque on the inferior surface of the mitral leaflet .
the parenchyma be slightly hyperemic in the apex of the left lung , and there be several firm , gray , fibrocalcific nodule measure as large as 3 mm . .
the endothelial cell line the sinusoid be prominent , and many contain large quantity of hemosiderin .
the liver weigh 2,090 gm . , be brown in color , and the cut surface be mottle by irregular pale area .
the mucosa of the stomach be atrophic and irregularly blacken over a 14 cm . area .
the small intestine and colon contain approximately 300 cc . of foul - smell , sanguineous material , and the mucosa throughout be hyperemic and mottle green - brown .
the mucosa of the jejunum and ileum show similar change , and in some area the submucosa be edematous and contain considerable number of neutrophil .
the kidney be pale and weigh right , 110 gm . , and leave , 230 gm . .
the surface be coarsely and finely granular and punctuate by clear , fluid - fill cyst measure up to 3 cm . in diameter .
these change be more marked in the atrophic right kidney than in the left .
the bone of the vertebral body , rib , and sternum be soft and be easily compress .
the marrow of the vertebral body be pale and show area of fatty replacement .
the cell of the erythroid , myeloid , and megakaryocytic series be normal except for their number .
the muscle of the extremity , chest wall , neck , and abdominal wall be soft , pale , and atrophic .
such swollen fiber be deeply eosinophilic , contain a few pyknotic nucleus , and show loss of cross - striation , obliteration of myofibril , and prominent vacuolization .
the necrosis often involve only a portion of the length of a give fiber , and usually the immediately adjacent fiber be normal .
as show in Figure 3 , the protoplasm of other fiber be pale , granular , or flocculate and invade by phagocyte .
inflammatory cell be strikingly absent .
individual nucleus be usually oval to round , though occasionally elongate , and frequently small and somewhat pyknotic .
in all of the section examine , the arteriole and small artery be essentially normal .
the technique of cut section be essentially the same as that describe by Coons et al ( 1951 ) .
root and stem tumor from sweet clover plant infect with WTV be quick - frozen in liquid nitrogen , embed in ice , and cut at 3 - 6 * * ym in a cryostat maintain at -16 - degree to -20 - degree .
the only treatment by which nonspecific staining could be satisfactorily remove be by pass the conjugate through a deae - cellulose column .
when 1 ml of conjugate be pass through a column ( Af ) , the first and second milliliter fraction collect be the most specific and give no nonspecific stain in some experiment , and very little in other .
in all case a disturbing amount of nonspecific staining be still present although it be still distinguishable from specific fluorescence .
these conjugate Af have much less nonspecific staining than the previous conjugate ( with 50 mg FITC per gram of globulin ) while the specific staining be similar in both case .
after pass Af through DEAE - cellulose , the titer of antibody to WTV in the specific fraction be 1 : 4 of the titer before such passage ( precipitin ring test by R. F. Whitcomb ) ; ;
the autofluorescence from the wall of the xylem cell be particularly brilliant .
result of specific staining by the direct and the indirect method be similar and show the localization of WTV antigen in certain tissue of tumor .
result of specific staining by the direct and the indirect method be similar and show the localization of WTV antigen in certain tissue of tumor .
within the pseudophloem cell the distribution of WTV antigen be irregular in the cytoplasm .
no antigen be detectable in certain dark spherical area in most cell .
after Af and Af be pass through Dowex-2 - chloride twice and treat twice with healthy sweet clover tissue powder , nonspecific staining be greatly reduce but a disturbing amount of such staining be still present .
such treatment of the conjugate have usually be successful in eliminate nonspecific staining in several other system ( Coons , 1958 ) .
in our work the good procedure for remove substance cause nonspecific staining in order to obtain specific conjugate be to pass the conjugate through a deae - cellulose column and in some case to absorb the first and second milliliter fraction with sweet clover tissue powder .
wound - tumor virus be a leafhopper transmit virus not easily transmissible by mechanical inoculation ( Black , 1944 ; ;
previous experience be obviously of great importance for the qualitative and quantitative emotional response .
the visceral brain as well as the neocortex be know to contribute to memory , but this topic be beyond the scope of this paper .
important as these difference be , they should not obscure the basic fact that by shift the hypothalamic balance sufficiently to the parasympathetic side , we produce depression , whereas a shift in the opposite direction cause excitatory effect and , eventually , maniclike change .
he show convincingly that anxiety be a learn ( condition ) reaction and be the basis of experimental and clinical neurosis and assume , therefore , that the neuronal change which underlie the neurosis be functional and reversible .
he show convincingly that anxiety be a learn ( condition ) reaction and be the basis of experimental and clinical neurosis and assume , therefore , that the neuronal change which underlie the neurosis be functional and reversible .
although in both emotion sympathetic symptom be present , different autonomic - somatic pattern underlie aggression and anxiety , respectively , as indicate by the rate of the excretion of the catecholamine , the state of the muscle tone , and the Mecholyl test .
second , even if the characteristic polynomial factor completely over F into a product of polynomial of degree 1 , there may not be enough characteristic vector for T to span the space v .
the characteristic polynomial for A be Af and this be plainly also the minimal polynomial for a ( or for t ) .
the diagonalizable operator be the special case of this in which Af for each I .
the theorem which we prove be more general than what we have describe , since it work with the primary decomposition of the minimal polynomial , whether or not the prime which enter be all of first degree .
the theorem which we prove be more general than what we have describe , since it work with the primary decomposition of the minimal polynomial , whether or not the prime which enter be all of first degree .
the theorem which we prove be more general than what we have describe , since it work with the primary decomposition of the minimal polynomial , whether or not the prime which enter be all of first degree .
the reader will find it helpful to think of the special case when the prime be of degree 1 , and even more particularly , to think of the proof of Theorem 10 , a special case of this theorem .
( c ) if Af be the operator induce on Af by T , then the minimal polynomial for Af be Af .
the idea of the proof be this .
if the direct - sum decomposition ( a ) be valid , how can we get hold of the projection Af associate with the decomposition ? ?
the projection Af will be the identity on Af and zero on the other Af .
we wish to show that the range of Af be exactly the subspace Af .
it be clear that each vector in the range of Af be in Af for if * * ya be in the range of Af , then Af and so Af because Af be divisible by the minimal polynomial p .
hence the minimal polynomial for Af be Af .
in the notation of the proof of Theorem 12 , let we take a look at the special case in which the minimal polynomial for t be a product of first - degree polynomial , i.e. , the case in which each Af be of the form Af .
now the range of Af be the null space Af of Af .
the reader should be familiar enough with projection by now so that he see that Af and in general that Af .
when Af for each i , we shall have Af , because the operator Af will then be 0 on the range of Af .
the diagonalizable operator d and the nilpotent operator N be uniquely determine by ( a ) and ( b ) and each of they be a polynomial in T .
for , use the fact that N and N ' commute Af and so when r be sufficiently large every term in this expression for Af will be 0 .
such an operator be obviously the zero operator ; ;
for since it be nilpotent , the minimal polynomial for this operator be of the form Af for some Af ; ;
but then since the operator be diagonalizable , the minimal polynomial can not have a repeat root ; ;
hence Af and the minimal polynomial be simply x , which say the operator be 0 .
these operator D and N be unique and each be a polynomial in T .
if T be a linear operator on an arbitrary vector space and if there be a monic polynomial p such that Af , then part ( a ) and ( b ) of Theorem 12 be valid for T with the proof which we give .
in litter of eight mouse from similar parent , the number of mouse with straight instead of wavy hair be an integer from 0 to 8 .
when three dice be toss repeatedly , what be the probability that the number of ace be 0 ( or 1 , or 2 , or 3 ) ? ?
when three dice be toss repeatedly , what be the probability that the number of ace be 0 ( or 1 , or 2 , or 3 ) ? ?
the major question in this chapter be : what be the probability of exactly x success in N trial ? ?
the major question in this chapter be : what be the probability of exactly x success in N trial ? ?
if three dice be toss , a trial be one toss of one die and the experiment be compose of three trial .
or , what amount to the same thing , if one die be toss three time , each toss be a trial , and the three toss form the experiment .
these example be illustrative of the use of the word ` ` trial '' and ` ` experiment '' as they be use in this chapter , but they be quite flexible word and it be well not to restrict they too narrowly .
consider only these Fridays , what be the probability that the coach have driver all 3 time ? ?
the 2 possible outcome on each trial be ` ` driver '' or ` ` nondriver '' .
since the choice be by lot each week , the outcome of different trial be independent .
since the choice be by lot each week , the outcome of different trial be independent .
for an experiment to qualify as a binomial experiment , it must have four property : ( 1 ) there must be a fix number of trial , ( 2 ) each trial must result in a ` ` success '' or a ` ` failure '' ( a binomial trial ) , ( 3 ) all trial must have identical probability of success , ( 4 ) the trial must be independent of each other .
we also give , for each property , an example where the property be absent .
the language and notation introduce be standard throughout the chapter .
here the number of trial be a random variable , not a fix number .
each of the N trial be either a success or a failure .
these word be more expressive than label like ` ` a '' and ` ` not - a '' .
we can escape from such a difficulty by rule out the animal as not constitute a trial , but such a solution be not always satisfactory .
note that we need not know the value of p , for the experiment to be binomial .
the trial be independent .
when this experiment be view as compose of five binomial trial , one for each member of the family , the outcome of the trial be obviously not independent .
the following be a less extreme example of dependence .
in repetition of the experiment from couple to couple , the vote of the two person in a couple probably agree more often than independence would imply , because couple who visit the museum together be more likely to have similar taste than be a random pair of people draw from the entire population of visitor .
for example , we be interested in the number of bull' - eye , not which shot be bull' - eye .
thus we do not score the number of bull' - eye , and the random variable be not the number of success .
the constancy of p and the independence be the condition most likely to give trouble in practice .
the outcome of the experiment be x success .
then the number of success be always 0 ) .
the set of all binomial distribution be call the family of binomial distribution , but in general discussion this expression be often shorten to ` ` the binomial distribution '' , or even ` ` the binomial '' when the context be clear .
the number of success on the five individual shot be , then , 0 , 0 , 1 , 0 , 1 .
the number of success on each shot be a value of a random variable that have value 0 or 1 , and there be 5 such random variable here .
their sum be x , the total number of success , which in this experiment have the value Af .
this theorem be similar to the theorem of Kakutani that there exist a circumscribing cube around any close , bound convex set in Af .
on C , from the point p at Af to the point q at Af , we construct the chord , and upon the chord as a side erect a square in such a way that as S approach zero the square be inside C .
as S approach t the square will be outside c and therefore both Af and Af must cross C an odd number of time as S vary from zero to T .
if the vertex be at Af , and if the interior of C be on the left as one move in the direction of increase t , then every such corner can be find from the curve obtain by rotate C clockwise through 90 - degree about the vertex .
if the vertex be at Af , and if the interior of C be on the left as one move in the direction of increase t , then every such corner can be find from the curve obtain by rotate C clockwise through 90 - degree about the vertex .
an ordinary point will be any point of intersection a such that in every neighborhood of a in the c - plane , Af meet both the interior and the exterior of C .
we first show that the function be single - value in some neighborhood .
in the f - plane the coordinate of the corresponding point be Af .
in a neighborhood of Q the difference between these function be also a single - value , analytic function of U .
furthermore , one can find a neighborhood of Q in which the difference function be monotone , for since it be analytic it can have only a finite number of extrema in any interval .
the arc be itself a segment of an analytic curve .
thus if e be sufficiently small , there can be only one intersection of C and Af near Q , for if there be more than one intersection for every e then the difference between C and Af near Q would not be a monotone function .
the fact that there can not be any limit point of the set except in closed interval follow from the argument use in Lemma 1 , namely , that near any tangent point in the c - plane the curve C and Af be analytic , and therefore the difference between they must be a monotone function in some neighborhood on either side of the tangent point .
in the neighborhood of an end point of an interval of tangent point in the f - plane the function be two - value or no - value on one side , and be a single - value function consist entirely of tangent point on the other side .
first , for any value of t for which all value of f{t } be ordinary point the number of value of f{t } must be odd .
for it be clear that the total number of ordinary intersection of C and Af must be even ( otherwise , start in the interior of C , Af could not finally return to the interior ) , and the center of rotation at T be the argument of the function , not a value .
for it be clear that the total number of ordinary intersection of C and Af must be even ( otherwise , start in the interior of C , Af could not finally return to the interior ) , and the center of rotation at T be the argument of the function , not a value .
the graph of f have at least one component whose support be the entire interval Aj .
thus the multiplicity of Af for a give t must be an even number .
but this be a contradiction , for we know that the multiplicity of f{t } be odd for every t .
we have show that the graph of F contain at least one component whose inverse be the entire interval { 0,T } , and whose multiplicity be odd .
we have show that the graph of F contain at least one component whose inverse be the entire interval { 0,T } , and whose multiplicity be odd .
we must now show that on some component of the graph there exist two point for which the correspond diagonal point in the C - plane be on opposite side of C .
these s - value be just the ordinary value of Af .
the root of this equation be just the ordinate of the intersection of the graph of B with a straight line of unit slope through Af in the b - plane ( the plane of the graph of b ) .
a general line L meet Q in two point , Af and Af , through each of which pass a unique generator of the regulus , Af , whose line be simple secant of Aj .
clearly , the transformation be involutorial .
moreover , from the definitive transformation of intercept on the generator of Af , it be clear that the only point of Q at which a line can meet its image be the point of Aj .
hence the totality of singular line be the t order complex of line which meet Aj .
the invariant line be the line of the congruence of secant of * * zg , since each of these meet Q in two point which be invariant .
the order of this congruence be Af , since Af secant of a curve of symbol ( b ) on a quadric surface pass through an arbitrary point .
the class of the congruence be Af , since an arbitrary plane meet * * zg in K point .
since the complex of singular line be of order K and since there be no complex of invariant line , it follow from the formula Af that the order of the involution be Af .
since the complex of singular line be of order K and since there be no complex of invariant line , it follow from the formula Af that the order of the involution be Af .
there be various set of exceptional line , or line whose image be not unique .
hence , think of as a line in a particular plane * * yp , any tangent to Q have a unique image and moreover this image be the same for all plane through L .
each generator , * * yl , of Af be also exceptional , for each be transform into the entire congruence of secant of the curve into which that generator be transform by the point involution on Q .
this curve be of symbol Af since it meet * * yl , and hence every line of Af in the Af invariant point on * * yl and since it obviously meet every line of Af in a single point .
the congruence of its secant be therefore of order Af and class Af .
a final class of exceptional line be identifiable from the follow consideration : since no two generator of Af can intersect , it follow that their image curve can have no free intersection .
therefore , the congruence of its secant , that be the image of a general plane field of line , be of order Af and class Af .
finally , the image of a general bundle of line be a congruence whose order be the order of the congruence of invariant line , namely Af and whose class be the order of the image congruence of a general plane field of line , namely Af .
finally , the image of a general bundle of line be a congruence whose order be the order of the congruence of invariant line , namely Af and whose class be the order of the image congruence of a general plane field of line , namely Af .
finally , the image of a general bundle of line be a congruence whose order be the order of the congruence of invariant line , namely Af and whose class be the order of the image congruence of a general plane field of line , namely Af .
we now shall show that any involution with these characteristic be necessarily of the type we have just describe .
by ( 1 ) , the image of this pencil be a rule surface of order Af which be meet by the plane of the pencil in a curve , C , of order Af .
thus it follow that the secant of * * zg be all invariant .
since a rule surface of order N with N concurrent generator be necessarily a cone , it follow finally that every line through a point , p , of * * zg meet its image at p , as asserted .
hence it follow that the involution within the bundle must be a perspective De Jonquieres involution of order Af and the invariant locus must have a multiple line of multiplicity either Af or Af .
in the first case the fix element within each pencil be the multiple secant and the line join the vertex , p , to the intersection of * * zg and the plane of the pencil which do not lie on the multiple secant .
in the second , the fix element be the line which join the vertex , p , to the two intersection of * * zg and the plane of the pencil which do not lie on the multiple secant .
the multiple secant , of course , be exceptional and in each case be transform into cone of order Af .
for if such be the case , either the plane of the two line would meet * * zg in more than K point or , alternatively , the order of the image regulus of the pencil determine by the two line would be too high .
but if no two line of the regulus of multiple secant of * * zg can intersect , then the regulus must be quadratic , or in other word , * * zg must be either a Af or a Af curve on a nonsingular quadric surface .
we now observe that the case in which * * zg be a Af curve on a quadric be impossible if the complex of singular line consist exclusively of the line which meet Aj .
however , if there be no additional complex of singular line , the order of the image regulus of a pencil be precisely Af .
if * * ya be the multiple secant of * * zg which pass through Af and * * yb be the simple secant of * * zg which pass through Af , and if Af be the point in which * * ya meet * * zg , and if Af be the image of Af on the generator * * yb , it follow that the image of the line Af be Af .
our central goal should be to provide the great positive incentive for these society to tackle boldly the task which they face .
the society be likely to be characterize by have a fairly modernize urban sector and a relatively untouched rural sector , with very poor communication between the two .
the civil service in such society be generally inadequate to deal competently with the problem face they ; ;
we should spread the view that planning and national development be serious matter which call for effort as well as enthusiasm .
to achieve this goal of balanced development , communication between the central government and the local community must be such that the need and aspiration of the people themselves be effectively take into account .
land reform be likely to be a press issue in many of these country .
as an isolated policy , land reform be likely to be politically disruptive ; ;
on the economic front , the first priority of these country be to mobilize a vastly increase volume of resource .
several related task must be carry out if self - sustain growth be to be achieve .
thus , although the agenda of external assistance in the economic sphere be cumulative , and many of the policy suggest for nation in the early stage remain relevant , the basic purpose of american economic policy during the later stage of development should be to assure that movement into a stage of self - sustain growth be not prevent by lack of foreign exchange .
thus , although the agenda of external assistance in the economic sphere be cumulative , and many of the policy suggest for nation in the early stage remain relevant , the basic purpose of american economic policy during the later stage of development should be to assure that movement into a stage of self - sustain growth be not prevent by lack of foreign exchange .
for one thing , although considerable number of man have be train , bureaucracy be still deficient in many respect ; ;
this be the stage at which democratic development must take place if the society be to become an open community of creative people .
another great danger be that the emerge middle class will feel itself increasingly alienate from the political leader who still justify their dominance by reference to the struggle for independence or the early phase of nationalism .
the capacity of intellectual and member of the new professional class to contribute creatively to national development be likely to be destroy by a constrain sense of inferiority toward both their own political class and their colleague and professional counterpart in the West .
with the exception of treaty - making , foreign relation be historically concerned for the most part with condition of short or at least measurable duration .
the place of religion in the simple , preliterate society be quite definite ; ;
the place of religion in the simple , preliterate society be quite definite ; ;
in society like our , however , its place be less clear and more complex .
although the inner function of religion be not of direct significance in social organization , they have important indirect consequence .
if the inner function of religion be perform , the individual be a compose , ordered , motivated , and emotionally secure associate ; ;
in the last analysis , religion be the mean of induce , formulate , express , enhance , implement , and perpetuate man 's deep experience -- the religious .
man be first religious ; ;
the significant thing in it , at the high religious level , be the inner emotional , mental , and spiritual occurrence that fill the press human need of self - preservation , self - pacification , and self - completion .
the chief experience be the sensing of communion , and in the high religion , of a harmonious relationship with the supernatural power .
the universe be a safe and permanent home .
death be not permanent defeat and disappearance ; ;
religion at its good be out in front , ever beckon and lead on , and , as Lippman put it , ` ` mobilize all man 's scatter energy in one triumphant sense of his own infinite importance '' .
religion be vitally necessary in both societal maintenance and regulation .
the common ultimate value , end and goal foster by religion be a most important factor .
as he point out , a religious group can not exist without a collective credo , and the more extensive the credo , the more unified and strong be the group .
the religion , in fact , be an expression of the unity of the group , small or large .
the code be mechanism for training in , and direct and enforce , uniform social interaction , and for continually and publicly reassert the solidarity of the group .
his view be that every religion pertain to a community , and , conversely , every community be in one aspect a religious unit .
his view be that every religion pertain to a community , and , conversely , every community be in one aspect a religious unit .
the Jews for 2500 year have be a prime example , though the adherent of any world or interpeople religion be case in point .
among primitive people the sanction and dictate of religion be more binding than any of the other control exercise by the group ; ;
and in modern society such influence be still great .
overwhelmed with the care of five young child and concerned about persistent economic difficulty due to her husband 's marginal income , her defense of denial be excessively strong .
the result , dramatically visible in a matter of day in the family 's disrupt daily functioning , be a phobic - like fear that some terrible harm would befall the second twin , whose birth have not be anticipate .
in general , the approach be more active than passive , more out - reach than reflective .
while some regression be inevitable , it be discourage rather than encourage so that the transference do not follow the stage of plan regression associate with certain casework adaptation of the psychoanalytic model for insight therapy .
the initial interview must be therapeutic rather than purely exploratory in an information - seek sense .
while some suppression and some denial be not only necessary but healthy , the worker 's clinical knowledge must determine how these defense be be use , what healthy shift in defensive adaptation be indicate , and when effort at bring about change can be most effectively time .
over a relatively short period of time , usually about four to twelve week , the worker must be able to shift the focus , back and forth , between immediate external stressful exigency ( ` ` precipitate stress '' ) and the key , emotionally relevant issue ( ` ` underlying problem '' ) which be , often in a dramatic preconscious breakthrough , reactivate by the crisis situation , and hence once again amenable to resolution .
then , too , the utmost clinical flexibility be necessary in judiciously combine carefully time family - orient home visit , single and group office interview , and appropriate telephone follow - up call , if the worker be to be genuinely accessible and if the predict unhealthy outcome be to be actually avert in accordance with the principle of preventive intervention .
then , too , the utmost clinical flexibility be necessary in judiciously combine carefully time family - orient home visit , single and group office interview , and appropriate telephone follow - up call , if the worker be to be genuinely accessible and if the predict unhealthy outcome be to be actually avert in accordance with the principle of preventive intervention .
then , too , the utmost clinical flexibility be necessary in judiciously combine carefully time family - orient home visit , single and group office interview , and appropriate telephone follow - up call , if the worker be to be genuinely accessible and if the predict unhealthy outcome be to be actually avert in accordance with the principle of preventive intervention .
in addition , in many case , a variety of concrete social resource -- homemaker , day care , medical and financial aid -- must be reasonably available for the reality support need to bolster the family in its individual and collective cope and integrative effort .
at certain critical stage , and only for sound diagnostic reason , it may be important to accompany family member in their use of these resource if their problem - solve behavior be to be constructive rather than defeat .
finally , whatever the technique use , a twin goal be common to all preventive casework service : to cushion or reduce the force of the stress impact while at the same time to encourage and support family member to mobilize and use their ego capacity .
this problem be perhaps as old as social casework itself .
her conclusion have be bear out in the experience of many practitioner : ` ` short - contact interviewing be neither a truncated nor a telescope experience but be of the same essential quality as the so - call intensive case work '' .
thus , casework involve a limited number of interview be still to be regard in term of the quality of service render rather than of the quantity of time expend .
especially noteworthy be Levinger 's finding that the length of treatment per se be not a reliable indicator of successful outcome .
accord to a number of study , the important predictor be the nature and management of the client 's anxiety as well as the accessibility of the help person .
similarity to the approach which I have describe be evident in the prompt establishment of a help relationship , quick appraisal of key issue , and the immediate mobilization of treatment plan as the essential dynamic in help to further the ego 's cope effort in deal with the interplay of inner and outer stress .
willingness to take the risk of early and direct interpretation ( with the proviso that if the interpretation be too threatening , the worker can withdraw ) be another prominent feature in these effort .
willingness to take the risk of early and direct interpretation ( with the proviso that if the interpretation be too threatening , the worker can withdraw ) be another prominent feature in these effort .
my aim in mention this factor obviously be not to give license to ` ` wild therapy '' but rather to encourage we to use the time - honor clinical casework skill we already possess , and to use they with great confidence , precision , and professional pride .
our literature be already replete with a fantastic number of suggestion for preventive agency programming range from the immediately practical to the globally utopian .
tension management and communication of sentiment be the process involve in the functioning of the element of sentiment or feeling .
as Loomis remark , ` ` in the internal pattern the chief reason for interacting be to communicate like , friendship , and love among those who stand in support relation to one another and correspond negative sentiment to those who stand in antagonistic relation '' .
from the evidence ` ` it may be conjecture that core - core marriage be the preferred union for core male and female ; ;
despite the increase rate of exogamous marriage , the population have be able to sustain , at least to some degree , the consciousness of its intermediate status in society .
the adherence of many in the population to the indian background in their pedigree , and emphasis upon the fact that their ancestor have never be slave , become of prime interest in determine how far these element promote the self - image of the intermediate status of the group in society .
however , because of Church law , lately more stringently enforce , which forbid the marriage of cousin closely relate consanguineously , a means of facilitate the goal of in - group relation may be that of recourse to illegitimate union .
it be hypothesize that fertility be a function of the social system when the population as a whole be consider and a function of the subsystem when the two - fold division of core family and marginal family be consider .
the four functional problem of a social system be , to some extent , solve by the subsystem within this population .
to maintain their intermediate position in the large society , it be not only necessary that member of this population be ` ` visible '' , but that their number be great enough to be recognize as a separate , distinct grouping or system in society .
to maintain their intermediate position in the large society , it be not only necessary that member of this population be ` ` visible '' , but that their number be great enough to be recognize as a separate , distinct grouping or system in society .
the value place by the Brandywine population , upon maintain a certain homogeneity , a certain separate racial identity , and therefore a certain separate social status , be important for the morale of the system .
institutionalization Though undoubtedly all six process be operative within the whole social system and its subsystem , two process that be of crucial importance to this study will be single out for particular emphasis .
institutionalization Though undoubtedly all six process be operative within the whole social system and its subsystem , two process that be of crucial importance to this study will be single out for particular emphasis .
intense interaction be easy where segregate live and occupational segregation mark off a group from the rest of the community , as in the case of this population .
however , the factor of physical isolation be not a static situation .
although the Brandywine population be still predominantly rural , ` ` there be indication of a consistent and a statistically significant trend away from the old and relatively isolated rural community .
this conclusion be , however , an over - simplification .
a more realistic analysis must take into account the fact that Brandywine people in the urban - fringe area be , in general , less segregate locally than group member in rural area .
group pressure toward conformity be slight or non - existent , and deviant behavior in mate selection incur few if any social sanction .
the process of social control be operative insofar as sanction play a part in the individual 's behavior , as well as the group 's behavior .
confused and divide though this tradition may be , it be an important part of the social and cultural heritage of the group , and act as a means of socialization , particularly for member of the rural community .
the fact of indian ancestry and ` ` free '' status during the day of slavery , be important distinction make by member of the group .
` ` culturally induce social cohesion result from common norm and value internalize by member of the group '' be operative in the boundary maintenance of the group as well as in the process of socialization .
'' Boundary maintenance for this group would seem to be primarily social , as be the preference for endogamy .
the card of permanent out - migrant be , in theory , send to an office in the place of new residence .
the scheme , in theory , be an ingenious adaptation of european registration system to the condition of african life .
so the result be subject to considerable confusion .
but the information on the dynamic of population be often quite misleading .
the initiation of sample census in Ruanda - Urundi ( 1952 ) and in the Congo ( 1955 - 57 ) be major advance .
however , the difference in procedure be fundamental .
it be still use in make current population estimate in post - census year , though the value of these estimate be open to question .
he find , as he have suspect , a general consensus that perhaps over half of the present functionally design course be not really functional for these student .
however , all admit that the ` ` hindsight '' be not altogether lose .
have I be in an all - marry section I would have miss this , and I believe that this single aspect have be of great personal value to I '' .
but the weight of feeling be heavily in the opposite direction .
the philosophy have be that if they could find the time to attend class why not encourage they to get the credit and perhaps provide an incentive to do the work more effectively .
some of these speculation may have some merit , other be somewhat ambiguous .
but few who have experience marriage can dispute the fact that the focus of interpersonal relationship be different in marriage than in a pre - marital situation .
the writer never know from week to week just where the section might be .
since the writer have establish this democratic procedure in the beginning he have to go along with their decision -- after , of course , point out whether he think their decision be a wise or an unwise one .
thus the film see as they come in ( coordinate for the regular section ) , be often out of context .
supplemental outside reading report be handle just as in the other section , the major difference be that there be a noticeably deep level in the report outside reading by the married group .
not until the group be satisfied in this area be they willing to venture far to ( 2 ) , specific adjustment area , such as sex , in - law , religion , finance , and so on .
but just when be an unknown , and of course the long it do not happen , the strong her wish and belief that it might not .
since her bereavement this individual have report to the writer on numerous occasion about how helpful the class discussion be to she in this adjustment crisis .
both sex report that the discussion on sex adjustment within marriage be extremely enlightening .
he feel certain for the first time in his teaching experience that the man in the class understand that orgasm , as a criterion , be not nearly so essential for a satisfying female sexual experience as most male might think .
perhaps this be relate to the fact that all be in on it to some extent .
response such as ` ` rope with a loop in it '' , and ` ` two piece of rope '' , be quite characteristic .
five subject ( 12 % ) do not change until they have be tell that some people have something happen to their arm , what that something be , and also be give a demonstration .
four subject ( 10 % ) do not change even then but need the additional information that an arm - elevation under these circumstance be a perfectly normal reflex reaction which some people show while other do not .
at no time be it imply by the experimenter that the subject 's initial reaction be deviant .
Autosuggestibility , the reaction of the subject in such a way as to conform to his own expectation of the outcome ( i.e. , that the arm - rise be a reaction to the pressure exert in the voluntary contraction , because of his knowledge that ` ` to every reaction there be an equal and opposite reaction '' ) also seem inadequate as an explanation for the follow reason : ( 1 ) the subject ' apparently genuine experience of surprise when their arm rise , and ( 2 ) manifestation of the phenomenon despite anticipation of something else happen ( e.g. , of become dizzy and maybe fall , an expectation spontaneously volunteer by one of the subject ) .
there be no implication make that their initial reaction ( absence of an arm - elevation ) be less preferred than the presence of levitation .
a more tenable explanation for the change in reaction be that the add knowledge and increase familiarity with the total situation make it possible for these subject to be less guard and to relax , since any reaction seem acceptable to the examiner as ` ` normal '' .
a more tenable explanation for the change in reaction be that the add knowledge and increase familiarity with the total situation make it possible for these subject to be less guard and to relax , since any reaction seem acceptable to the examiner as ` ` normal '' .
while other condition might be even more effective in bring about a change from immobility to mobility in Kohnstamm reactivity , it be our hypothesis that all such condition would have as a common factor the capacity to induce an attitude in the subject which enable he to divorce himself temporarily from feeling of responsibility for his behavior .
this subject be one who give an arm - elevation on the second trial in the naive state but not in the first .
they feel that they be relax as much as they could and that any control factor which might be present to prevent response must be on an unconscious level .
the above discussion do not mean to imply that control factor be completely in abeyance in the Kohnstamm - positive subject ; ;
it be our hypothesis that Kohnstamm - positive subject be less hesitant about relinquish control than be Kohnstamm - negative subject ; ;
it be our hypothesis that Kohnstamm - positive subject be less hesitant about relinquish control than be Kohnstamm - negative subject ; ;
yet they be not so bind by past experience and constriction as to deny their immediate perception and to be dominate by their knowledge of what the experience should be .
it might be postulate that these subject be unduly afraid of be wrong ; ;
while the interpretation that have be give be inference only , they gain support from such comment as the following , which be make by one of the Kohnstamm - negative subject who do not , on the first trial , perceive the tilt illusion .
the structured school be in an industrial city , with three - family tenement house typical of the residential area , but with one rather sizable section of middle - class home .
the unstructured school be in a large suburban community , predominantly middle- to upper - middle class , but fringe by an industrial area .
child whose reading score be at least one standard deviation below the regression line of each total third - grade school population be consider under - achiever for the purpose of sample selection .
child whose reading score be at least one standard deviation below the regression line of each total third - grade school population be consider under - achiever for the purpose of sample selection .
over - achiever be at least one standard deviation above the regression line in their school system .
the final sample be not significantly different from a normal distribution in regard to read achievement or intelligence test score .
it be assume that the sample procedure be purely random with respect to the personality variable under investigation .
child score high in compulsivity be those who give evidence of tension or emotionality in situation where there be lack of organization or conformity to standard and expectation , or who make exaggerated effort to achieve these goal .
the low compulsive child be one who appear relatively unconcerned about such matter .
in theory , compulsive behavior be a way of diminish anxiety , and one might expect a negative association except for the possibility that for many child the obsessive - compulsive defense be not sufficient to quell the amount of anxiety they suffer .
in theory , compulsive behavior be a way of diminish anxiety , and one might expect a negative association except for the possibility that for many child the obsessive - compulsive defense be not sufficient to quell the amount of anxiety they suffer .
the relationship of intelligence test score to school achievement be a well - establish fact ( in this case , Af ) ; ;
the criterion score use in the statistical analysis be an index of over- or under - achievement .
if a child with an I.Q. of 120 score 5.5 in achievement , his discrepancy score would be , represent of one year of over - achievement .
if such a child score 3.0 , his discrepancy score would be -.5 , represent of one year of under - achievement .
indeed their achievement score be somewhat well on an absolute basis although the difference be not significant .
indeed their achievement score be somewhat well on an absolute basis although the difference be not significant .
we speculate that compulsive in the unstructured school be under great strain because of the lack of systemization in their school setting , but that their need to organize ( for comfort ) be so intense that they struggle to induce the phonic rule and achieve in spite of the lack of direction from the environment .
we speculate that compulsive in the unstructured school be under great strain because of the lack of systemization in their school setting , but that their need to organize ( for comfort ) be so intense that they struggle to induce the phonic rule and achieve in spite of the lack of direction from the environment .
possibly their compulsivity be not strong enough to cause they to build their own structure .
our conjecture be , then , that regardless of the manner in which school lesson be teach , the compulsive child accentuate those element of each lesson that aid he in systematize his work .
figure 2 be a graph of the mean achievement score of each group .
the most striking aspect of the interaction demonstrate be the marked decrement in performance suffer by the highly anxious child in unstructured school .
the fact that such threat be potent in the beginning reading lesson be think to be a vital factor in the continue pattern of failure or under - achievement these child exhibit .
but the symbol he be ask to learn be simple .
as show early , the highly anxious individual may be superior in his memorizing of simple element .
apparently academic challenge in the structured setting create an optimum of stress so that the child with high anxiety be able to achieve because he be arouse to an energetic state without become confused or panic .
Sarason et al present evidence that the anxious child will suffer in the test - like situation , and that his performance will be impair unless he receive support and accept treatment from the teacher .
although the present study be not a direct replication of their investigation , the result do not confirm their conclusion .
observer , in the two school system study here , judge the teacher in the structured school to be more impersonal and demanding , while the atmosphere in the unstructured school be judge to be more support and accept .
interview , check reference , train the salesman , have they go with more experienced salesman be expensive -- and the rate of attrition due to resignation or unsatisfactory performance be too high .
each person be to enter the testing room , carry a suitcase of sample .
each salesman be to read a sheet contain a description of the product .
the reason for the value of this procedure be simply that the applicant be test ` ` at work '' in different situation by the judgment of a number of expert who could see how the salesman conduct themselves with different , but typical restaurant owner and manager .
all applicant be generally familiar with the work of the receptionist .
each girl be independently ` ` test '' by the personnel man , and he serve not only as the director , but as the antagonist and the observer .
we may say that his attitude be foolish , since he may have be a success have he learn some human relation skill ; ;
or we may say that his attitude be commendable , show his independence of mind , in his refusal to adjust to the opinion of other .
the necessary step between diagnosis and training be acceptance of the validity of the criticism .
when an evaluative situation be set up , and no concern be with the detail that lead to an over - all estimate , we say that roleplay be use for evaluation .
this behavior be more ` ` veridical '' -- or true -- than other testing behavior for some type of evaluation , and so can give quick and accurate estimate of complex functioning .
the objective of this chapter be to clarify the distinction between spontaneity theory and other training concept .
the goal will be to provide the reader with an integrate rationale to aid he in apply roleplay technique in this unique training area .
the reason for extract this particular roleplaying application from the previous discussion of training be twofold .
spontaneity training theory be unique and relatively new .
what have be an unmanageably powerful introject be now , despite its continue charge of energy disconcert to I , sufficiently within control of her ego that she could use it to show I what this introject mother be like .
particularly hard for the therapist to grasp be those instance in which the patient be manifest an introject traceable to something in the therapist , some aspect of the therapist of which the latter be himself only poorly aware , and the recognition of which , as a part of himself , he find distinctly unwelcome .
another patient , a paranoid woman , for many month infuriate not only I but the ward - personnel and her fellow patient by arrogantly behave as though she own the whole building , as though she be the only person in it whose need be to be meet .
one can not assume , of course , that all these accumulate meaning be inherent in the stereotype at the beginning of the therapy , or at any one time later on when the stereotype be utter ; ;
of all the possible form of nonverbal expression , that which seem good to give release , and communicational expression , to complex and undifferentiated feeling be laughter .
this be a question which I have no wish to take up -- condensation be a phenomenon in which one find not a condense expression of various feeling and idea which be , at an unconscious level , well sort out , but rather a condense expression of feeling and idea which , even in the unconscious , have yet to become well differentiated from one another .
Freeman , Cameron and McGhie , in their description of the disturbance of thinking find in chronic schizophrenic patient , say , in regard to condensation , that ` ` the lack of adequate discrimination between the self and the environment , and the object contain therein in itself be the prototypical condensation '' .
or , equally often , a concretistic - seem , particularistic - seem statement may consist , with its mundane exterior , in a form of poetry -- may be full of meaning and emotion when interpret as a figurative expression : a metaphor , a smile , an allegory , or some other symbolic mode of speak .
of such hide meaning the patient himself be , more often than not , entirely unaware .
his subjective experience may be a remarkably concretistic one .
one hebephrenic woman confide to I , ` ` I live in a world of word '' , as if , to she , word be fully concrete object ; ;
for English the reduction in size be less striking .
the dictionary be a form dictionary , at least in the sense that complete form be use as the basis for match text occurrence with dictionary entry .
a third situation be possible .
if cell Af be not an information cell we conclude that the i - th dictionary form be not in the text list .
only the assignment of the information cell be important .
the first stage of translation after glossary lookup be structural analysis of the input text .
the order be identical to the ordering of the form they describe .
the only requirement on dictionary information make by the text - lookup operation be that each form represent by the dictionary be available for lookup in the text - form list and that information for each form be available in a sequence identical with the sequence of the form .
the only requirement on dictionary information make by the text - lookup operation be that each form represent by the dictionary be available for lookup in the text - form list and that information for each form be available in a sequence identical with the sequence of the form .
the only requirement on dictionary information make by the text - lookup operation be that each form represent by the dictionary be available for lookup in the text - form list and that information for each form be available in a sequence identical with the sequence of the form .
( here an entry be a form plus the information that pertain to it .
two very useful way for modify a form - dictionary be the addition to the dictionary of complete paradigm rather than single form and the application of a single change to more than one dictionary form .
if all form of a paradigm be group together within the dictionary , a considerable reduction in the amount of information require be possible .
the dictionary system be in no way dependent upon such summarization or design around it .
the tendency be toward put dominant stress at the end .
thus the first line of one of Charles Wesley 's hymn be as follow .
dominant stress be of course more than extended duration , and normally center on syllable that would have primary stress or phrase stress if the word or long unit they be part of be speak alone : a dominant stress give to glorify would normally center on its first syllable rather than its last .
but the parallel be significant .
from the point of view of syntactic analysis the head word in the statement be the predicator have break , and from the point of view of mean it would seem that the trouble center in the breaking ; ;
in I know one thing dominant stress will usually be on the complement one thing ; ;
in small - town people be very friendly dominant stress will generally be on the complement very friendly ; ;
in what be a linguist ? ?
dominant stress will generally be on the subject a linguist ; ;
dominant stress be on her luggage both in that be her luggage , where her luggage be the complement , and in there be her luggage , where it be the subject .
dominant stress be on her luggage both in that be her luggage , where her luggage be the complement , and in there be her luggage , where it be the subject .
adverbial second complement , however , be likely not to have dominant stress when they terminate sentence .
be George put the cat out , dominant stress will ordinarily be on the first complement , the cat , not the second complement out .
context be of extreme importance .
thus in a context in which there have be discussion of snow but mention of local condition be new , dominant stress will probably be on here in it rarely snow here , but in a context in which there have be discussion of local weather but no mention of snow , dominant stress will probably be on snow .
thus in a context in which there have be discussion of snow but mention of local condition be new , dominant stress will probably be on here in it rarely snow here , but in a context in which there have be discussion of local weather but no mention of snow , dominant stress will probably be on snow .
the personal pronoun and substitute one be normally unstressed because they refer to what be prominent in the immediate context .
but if George have just be mention prominently ( and the trip to be make have be under discussion ) , what be say be probably I will go with he , and dominant stress be probably on the preposition with .
but if George have just be mention prominently ( and the trip to be make have be under discussion ) , what be say be probably I will go with he , and dominant stress be probably on the preposition with .
if both George and a piece of information George do not have be prominent in the context , but the idea of tell George be new , then dominant stress will probably be on tell in why not tell George ? ?
if both George and a piece of information George do not have be prominent in the context , but the idea of tell George be new , then dominant stress will probably be on tell in why not tell George ? ?
in there be not many young people in the neighborhood the modifier young take dominant stress away from its head people : the fact that the young creature of interest be people seem rather obvious .
in I know one thing dominant stress be likely to go to one rather than to semantically pale thing .
in she have it in for George dominant stress will ordinarily be on in , where the notion of store - up antipathy seem to center .
in we be paint at our garage strong stress on at indicate that the job be do be not real painting but simply an effort at painting .
thus in his friend be strange than his sister ' strong stress be normal for his and sister ' , but in his friend be strange than his sister strong stress be normal for friend and sister .
thus in his friend be strange than his sister ' strong stress be normal for his and sister ' , but in his friend be strange than his sister strong stress be normal for friend and sister .
in hunger stimulate man too the situation be very similar .
in hunger stimulate man too the situation be very similar .
in of all the suggestion that be make , his be the silly the possessive his represent his suggestion and be stress .
omission of a subordinator pronoun , however , do not result in an increase in stress on a prepositional adverb for which the subordinator pronoun would be object .
when I have instruction to leave be equivalent in meaning to I have instruction that I be to leave this place , dominant stress be ordinarily on leave .
when the same sequence be equivalent in meaning to I have instruction which I be to leave , dominant stress be ordinarily on instruction .
when the same sequence be equivalent in meaning to I have instruction which I be to leave , dominant stress be ordinarily on instruction .
in the first of these sentence if by be the complement of come and Tuesday be an adjunct of time equivalent to on Tuesday , there will be strong stress on by in the spoken language ; ;
in the second sentence if drinking water be a gerundial clause and without drinking water be roughly equivalent in meaning to unless I drink water , there will be strong stress on water than on drinking ; ;
but if drinking be a gerundial noun modify water and without drinking water be equivalent to without water for drinking , there will be strong stress on drinking than on water .
and pattern of stress be not always unambiguous by any mean .
in the Steiners have busy life without visit relative only context can indicate whether visit relative be equivalent in meaning to pay visit to relative or to relative who be visit they , and in I look up the number and I look up the chimney only the meaning of number and chimney make it clear that up be syntactically a second complement in the first sentence and a preposition follow by its object in the second .
-- syllable be linguistic unit center in peak which be usually vocalic but , as have be note , be consonantal under certain circumstance , and which may or may not be combine with precede and/or follow consonant or combination of consonant .
syllable be genuine unit , but division of word and sentence into they present great difficulty .
sometimes even the number of syllable be not clear .
it be obvious enough that linguist in general have be less successful in cope with tone system than with consonant or vowel .
no single explanation be adequate to account for this .
improvement , however , be urgent , and at least three thing will be need .
tone analysis will continue to be difficult and unsatisfactory until a more representative selection of system be familar to every practice field linguist .
the second need be well field technique .
the great majority of present - day linguist fall into one or more of a number of overlap type : those who be convinced that tone can not be analyse , those who be personally scared of tone and tone language generally , those who be convinced that tone be merely an unnecessary marginal feature in those language where it occur , those who have no idea how to proceed with tone analysis , those who take a simplistic view of the whole matter .
the result have be neglect , fumble effort , or superficial treatment .
analysis such as these four will simultaneously combat the assumption that tone be impossible and that it be simple .
the third need be for well theory .
we should expect that general phonologic theory should be as adequate for tone as for consonant and vowel , but it have not be .
this can only be for one of two reason : either the two be quite different and will require totally different theory ( and hence technique ) , or our exist theory be insufficiently general .
if , as I suspect , the problem be largely of the second sort , then development of a theory well able to handle tone will result automatically in well theory for all phonologic subsystem .
one issue that must be face be the relative difficulty of analysis of different phonologic subsystem .
tone system be certainly more complex than the number of unit would suggest , and often analytically more difficult than much large consonantal system .
the problem be to disentangle the linguistic feature of pitch from the co - occurring nonlinguistic feature .
but in general the individual variation be a small thing add onto basic linguistic feature of great magnitude .
with tone , individual difference may be great than the linguistic contrast which be superimpose on they .
some phonetic feature , for example glottal catch or murmur , be sometimes to be assign to segmental phonemic and sometimes to accentual system .
but no other two phonologic system be as difficult to disentangle as be tone and intonation in some language .
but no other two phonologic system be as difficult to disentangle as be tone and intonation in some language .
while the phoneme can be very easily state , no one be likely to be satisfied with the statement until phonemic occurrence can be relate in some way to morphemic unit , i.e. until the morphophonemic be work out , or at least far enough that it seem reasonable to expect success .
in the ` ` typical tone language '' , tonal morphophonemic be of the same order of complexity as consonantal morphophonemic .
the phonemic system which must support these morphophonemic system , however , be very different .
the inventory of tone be much small , and commonly the contrast range along one single dimension , pitch level .
consonantal system be not merely large , they be multidimensional .
the possibility in the consonantal system be very numerous , and only a small portion of they be actually use .
the possibility be few , and the total number of rule may be considerably great .
the possibility be few , and the total number of rule may be considerably great .
tonal morphophonemic be much more confusing to the beginning analyst than consonantal morphophonemic , even when the total number of rule be no great .
tonal morphophonemic be much more confusing to the beginning analyst than consonantal morphophonemic , even when the total number of rule be no great .
the difficulty of analysis of any subsystem in the phonology be an inverse function of the size -- small system be more troublesome -- for any give degree of morphophonemic complexity .
the difficulty of analysis of any subsystem in the phonology be an inverse function of the size -- small system be more troublesome -- for any give degree of morphophonemic complexity .
this hypothesis will account for a large part of the difficulty of tonal analysis , as well as the fact that vowel system be often more puzzling than consonantal system .
the statement of the system be a different matter .
and the more complex the morphophonemic system be in relation to the phonemic base , the less easily a phonemic system will be analyse without close attention to the morphophonemic -- at least , the less satisfying will a phonemic statement be if it can not be relate through morphophonemic rule to grammatically meaningful structure .
and the more complex the morphophonemic system be in relation to the phonemic base , the less easily a phonemic system will be analyse without close attention to the morphophonemic -- at least , the less satisfying will a phonemic statement be if it can not be relate through morphophonemic rule to grammatically meaningful structure .
there have be a tendency on the part of many american linguist to assume that a phonemic transcription will automatically be the well possible orthography and that the only real problem will then be the social one of secure acceptance .
there have be a tendency on the part of many american linguist to assume that a phonemic transcription will automatically be the well possible orthography and that the only real problem will then be the social one of secure acceptance .
Most other have be content to give only the most general attention to the broad and most obvious feature of the phonology when design orthography .
apparently the feeling be that anything more would be involvement in technical abstruseness of possible pedantic interest but of no visible significance in practical affair .
apparently the feeling be that anything more would be involvement in technical abstruseness of possible pedantic interest but of no visible significance in practical affair .
the result of this attitude have be the domination of many orthography conference by such consideration as typographic ' esthetic ' , which usually turn out to be nothing more than certain prejudice carry over from european language .
linguist have not always be more enlighten than ` ` practical people '' and sometimes have insist on incredibly trivial point while neglect thing of much great significance .
as a result , many people have be confirm in their conviction that orthography design be not an activity to which expert can contribute anything but confusion .
his objective be merely to determine ` ` what distinction of length and syllabicity it may be desirable to make explicit in a Kikuyu orthography '' ( 59 ) .
his orthographic recommendation be no simplistic acceptance of phonemic on the one hand or of superficiality on the other .
we need many more study of this sort if the design of write language be to be put on a sound basis .
my comment must be briefer than the paper deserve .
the treatment seem unnecessarily loose - jointed and complex , largely because the method be lax and the analysis seem never to be push to a satisfactory or even a consistent stopping - point .
the differentiation , however , be not very much great , as show by the fact that Athabascan show 3.46 stem per meaning slot as against 2.75 for yokut , with a slightly great number of language represent in our sample : 24 as against 21 .
) these general fact be mention to make clear that the total situation in the two family be similar enough to warrant comparison .
the great difference in the two set of figure be due to difference in the two set of list use .
the result be that I include 70 animal name , but Swadesh only 4 ; ;
the group be therefore really non - comparable in content as well as in size .
it will be see that where the scope be similar , the athabascan ratio come out somewhat high ( as indeed they ought to with a total ratio of 2.8 as against 3.5 or 4 : 5 ) except for verb , where alone the athabascan ratio be low .
it will be see that where the scope be similar , the athabascan ratio come out somewhat high ( as indeed they ought to with a total ratio of 2.8 as against 3.5 or 4 : 5 ) except for verb , where alone the athabascan ratio be low .
or the exception may be due to a particular durability peculiar to the athabascan verb .
the total for these five category be not too uneven , namely 20 , 15 , 11 , 16 , 9 respectively .
for Athabascan , with a great range of stem , the first two of five correspond column be identical , 1 and 2 stem ; ;
if the distribution of the 71 item be wholly concordant in the two family , the distance would of course be 0 .
if the distribution of the 71 item be wholly concordant in the two family , the distance would of course be 0 .
if it be wholly random and unrelated , it would be 2.0 , assume the five class be equal in n , which approximately they be .
Thomas ' finding be , first , ` ` that the individual item vary greatly and unpredictably in their persistence '' ; ;
his first conclusion , on behavior of individual item , be negative , whereas mine ( on Ath . and Yok . ) be partially positive .
his first conclusion , on behavior of individual item , be negative , whereas mine ( on Ath . and Yok . ) be partially positive .
thus his persistence value for some stem frequency per meaning be : stem identical in 8 language , 100 % ; ;
have Hoijer substitute for his 15 adjectival slot 15 good animal and plant item , his rate of stem replacement would have be low and the age of athabascan language separation small .
but it be become increasingly evident that such a hope be a snare .
but the nearer it come to attain universality , the less significant will it be linguistically .
the practical operational problem of lexicostatistic be the establishment of a basic list of item of meaning against which the particular form or term of language can be match as the medium of comparison .
the most important quality of the meaning be that they should be as definable as possible .
in proportion as meaning be concrete , we can well rely on their be insulate and distinctive .
but the far out he move , the thinner will be his hold on conclusive evidence , and the large the speculative component in his inference .
there would be no conceivable sense in go to the opposite extreme of select item whose form be the most unstable .
the moving of million of the german master - race , from the very heart of Junkerdom , to make room for the Polish Slavs whom they have enslave and openly plan to exterminate be a drastic operation , but there be little doubt that it be historically justify .
the issue be acute because the exile Polish Government in London , support in the main by Britain , be still compete with the new Lublin Government form behind the Red Army .
the result be an agreement that the Lublin Government should be ` ` reorganize on a broad democratic basis with the inclusion of democratic leader from Poland itself and from the Poles abroad '' , and pledge to hold ` ` free and unfettered election as soon as possible on the basis of universal suffrage and secret ballot '' .
all ` ` democratic and anti - nazi party '' be to have the right to campaign .
speak with ` ` great earnestness '' , he say : ` ` for the russian people , the question of Poland be not only a question of honor but also a question of security .
this reasoning be also as inevitable as anything could be .
this reasoning be also as inevitable as anything could be .
here be the good short explanation of the origin of the Cold War that have be write .
the second major aspect of the election be the actual procedure of registration , nomination and voting .
considerable technical skill be use and the administration of the election be generally above reproach .
however , the regionally differentiate result , which appear below in table , be interesting evidence of the problem of develop self - government under even the most favorable circumstance .
a third aspect , and probably the one open to most controversy , be the result of the election .
the fourth and concluding point will be to estimate the long - run significance of the election and how they figure in the current pattern of internal politic .
in January , 1958 , the Minister of the Interior announce that an election law be ready to be submit to the King , the rumor of election date appear once again , first for spring of 1958 and later for the summer .
although the government be probably prepare for election by mid-1958 , the first decision be no doubt make more difficult as party strife multiply .
although the government be probably prepare for election by mid-1958 , the first decision be no doubt make more difficult as party strife multiply .
the party be on the whole unprepared for election , while the people be still experience post - independence let - down and suffer the after - effect of poor harvest in 1957 .
by this time there be little doubt but what election plan be complete .
although the election be for local official , it be not necessary to conduct the election so as to prevent party from publicly identify their candidate .
both party and the Ministry of the Interior be busily at work after the election try to unearth the political affiliation of the successful candidate and , thereby , give the election a confidential but known degree of national political significance .
the U.N.F.P. learn that its urban organization , which depend heavily on U.M.T. support , be most effective .
the overall effect be probably to stimulate more party activity in the communal election than might have otherwise take place .
a second major point of this essay be to examine the formal arrangement for the election .
furthermore , the problem and solution devise in the electoral experience of the rapidly change country be often of comparative value and essential to evaluate election result .
the sine qua non of the election be naturally an impartial and standardized procedure .
centrally , however , the administrative problem be more complex and the sheer prestige of office be very likely an unfair advantage .
centrally , however , the administrative problem be more complex and the sheer prestige of office be very likely an unfair advantage .
although the monarch have frequently assert that the election be to be without party significance , his action be an implicit admission that party identification be a factor .
although the monarch have frequently assert that the election be to be without party significance , his action be an implicit admission that party identification be a factor .
although the monarch have frequently assert that the election be to be without party significance , his action be an implicit admission that party identification be a factor .
the government be most anxious that there be a respectable response .
unemployed old worker who have no expectation of secure employment in the occupation in which they be skilled should be able to secure counseling and retrain in an occupation with a future .
the great impact of the matching - fund principle have be in initially encourage the poor state and school district to spend enough to obtain their full allocation of outside fund .
national defense consideration have be the major reason behind most federal training expenditure in recent decade .
the total cost of the five - year program be $ 297 million .
for the Smith - Hughes , George - Barden , and National Defense Act of 1958 , the cumulative total of federal expenditure in 42 year be only about $ 740 million .
no comparable measure be available of enrollment and expenditure for private vocational education training .
an important recent trend be the development of area vocational school .
the Title 8 , program of the National Defense Education Act of 1958 be a great spur to this trend toward area school .
the major training need of a new industrial plant be a short period of pre - employment training for a large number of semi - skilled machine operator .
a prospective industry also may be interested in the long - run advantage of training program in the area to supply future skilled worker and provide supplementary extension course for its employee .
additional course can readily be add and special cooperative program work out with any new industry if the basic facility , staff and program be in be .
the major weakness of vocational training program in labor surplus area be their focus on serve solely local job demand .
this weakness be not unique to labor surplus area , for it be inherent in the system of local school district in this country .
this procedure be extremely shortsighted in chronic labor surplus area with a long history of decline employment .
moreover , the current information on what type of training be need and possible be too limited and fragmentary .
a related question be whether unemployed worker can be motivate to take the training provide .
again , one major difficulty be the local focus .
a training program in a depressed area may have few enrollee unless there be some apparent prospect for well employment opportunity afterwards , and the prospect may be poor if the training be aim solely at job in the local community .
another problem be who will pay for the training .
local school district be hard press financially and unenthusiastic about vocational training .
program usually be expand only when outside fund be available or local business leader demand it .
even industrial development leader find it hard to win local support for training unless a new industry be in sight and request it .
state government have be take the lead in establish area vocational school , but their focus be still on area job opportunity .
only the federal government be likely to be able to take a long - run and nation - wide view and to pay for training to meet national skilled manpower need .
a further possibility be suggest by the example of the G. I. bill and also by some recent trend in attitude toward improve college education : that be to provide financial assistance to individual for vocational training when local facility be inadequate .
this probably would require some support for subsistence as well as for tuition , but the total would be no great than for the proposal of unemployment compensation or a Youth Conservation Corps .
instead of be limit to the poor training facility in remote area , the student would be able to move to large institution of concentrated specialized training .
this expectation be what really ` ` sell '' point and figure .
even if we strip their respective claim to the bare minimum , the ` ` odd '' still favor they both , for the trend in effect be always more likely to continue than to reverse .
the foregoing have be method of chart price , but now let we look at some of the other index that be customarily chart , and which be look to for their forecasting ability .
the search for forecasting formulae be ceaseless .
the theory behind this be , of course , fundamentalist in character .
we now know that thing rarely ever work out in such cut - and - dry fashion , and that car loading , while perhaps interesting enough , be nevertheless not the magic formula that will always turn before stock price turn .
just as heavily invest be the endeavor of multitude of modern man who carry on the quest for the enchant index .
the market be far too subtle , and the last word in these endeavor will doubtless never be write , for the enchant index be about as nebulous as the fountain of youth .
the market be far too subtle , and the last word in these endeavor will doubtless never be write , for the enchant index be about as nebulous as the fountain of youth .
in the stock market , the normal trading package be a hundred share , just as 5,000 bushel be the standard grain contract package .
in the stock market , the normal trading package be a hundred share , just as 5,000 bushel be the standard grain contract package .
accord to the theory underlie odd - lot index , the trader who trade odd lot be most likely a small trader , one who can not afford to trade round lot .
the particular recipe be a matter of individual taste .
this warn the chartist that the formation in progress be quite likely to be a top .
thus , in the aggregate , the odd - lot trader be one who buy at the top and sell at the bottom , notwithstanding occasional individual exception .
while it have long be know in general , that ` ` the public be always wrong '' , the use of odd - lot index now put the adage on a statistical basis .
one might well wonder why the ` ` public be always wrong '' and the question raise be about as awkward as the one concern with the chicken and the egg .
strong hand differ from ` ` weak hand '' in that their operation be the primary mover .
needless to say , strong hand be not eager to be join by weak hand , for this increase the risk that they will have to absorb what these weak hand unload on the way up , at high price , during the run - up phase of the campaign .
certain badly disillusioned market critic be often apt to feel that there be something somehow unfair , dirty , or even thoroughly criminal about this interplay of competitive force .
but after all , can anyone imagine a market wherein the reverse of these thing be true ? ?
the study of odd - lot index be somehow akin to the spectacle of a man try to outfox his own shadow , what with all observer try to get on the side of the ` ` few '' at the same time .
Mr. Alexander H. Wheelan 's study help in Point and Figure Technique tell the reader : ` ` we assure you that the total number of people use this method of market analysis be a very small portion of the sum total of those operate in the security and commodity market '' .
though the method of decide may be profound and diverse , the possible conclusion remain but two .
the purpose set forth at the beginning of this book be first to introduce the reader to a general background knowledge of the various type and capability of the forecasting method already in use , so that he might then be in a position to evaluate for himself the validity of the rather astonishing empirical correlation that be to follow , and to appraise the forecast that its interpretation suggest for the future of farm price over the year immediately ahead .
in assess the outlook for interest rate in 1961 , the question , as always , be the prospect for general business activity .
although the pause in the advance of general business activity this year have thus far be quite modest , it be hard to escape the conclusion that the soften process will continue into the first quarter of 1961 and possibly somewhat long .
these sign be the inventory of unsold house in some area of the country and the moderate rise in vacancy rate for apartment ( 7.6 % in September ) .
the pattern of general business activity which probably lie ahead of we be a far moderate softening through the spring of 1961 before a new rise in economic activity get under way .
it suggest that during the next several month , through the spring of 1961 , the demand for long - term capital fund may be moderately low and that interest rate may tend to move a little low , especially the rate on Federal , state , and local bond , as well as those on publicly offer corporate bond .
however , as witness by the large corporate bond calendar at present , as well as the record amount of municipal bond issue approve by voter , the over - all demand for capital fund seem likely to remain high , so that any downward pressure on rate from reduce demand should not be great .
certainly a further reduction in the discount rate would be a strong possibility , as well as an easy reserve position for the banking system .
my guess would be that interest rate will decline moderately into the spring of 1961 and during the second half of the year will turn up gradually to recover the ground lose during the downturn .
my answer be in the negative because I believe that total capital demand during the Sixties will continue to press against available supply , and interest rate will generally tend to be firm at high level .
this make it certain that Federal expenditure for military preparedness and foreign economic aid be likely to rise far in the next several year .
moreover , it be likely that federal policy aim at stimulate a fast rate of economic growth of the country , to keep ahead of the communist country and to demonstrate that our free economic system be well than theirs , will lead to rise Federal spending in certain area such as education , housing , medical aid , and the like .
however , the impact of a rise rate of household formation this decade should not be exaggerated .
the average annual rate of 1,083,000 in the second half of the Sixties be still considerably below the annual rate of 1,525,000 in the three - year period from April 1947 to March 1950 .
in a more pessimistic vein about the economic outlook , I suspect that the reservoir of demand for consumer good and housing which be dam - up during the Thirties and World War 2 , be finally in the process of run dry .
in a way , we may be witness the same thing in the sale of automobile today as the public no long be willing to purchase any car come on the market but be more insistent on compact car free of the frill which be accept in the Fifties .
accordingly , during the Sixties our national economy be likely to grow at as fast a rate as in the Fifties and , in the process , to require enormous amount of capital fund .
wage - price policy of industry be the result of a complex of force -- no single explanation have be find which apply to all case .
the purpose of this paper be to analyze one possible force which have not be treat in the literature , but which we believe make a significant contribution to explain the wage - price behavior of a few very important industry .
while there may be several such industry to which the model of this paper be applicable , the author make particular claim of relevance to the explanation of the course of wage and price in the steel industry of the United States since World War 2 .
the contribution of this paper be a demonstration of this proposition , and an exploration of some of its implication .
part 4 , be a brief summary .
the Mathematical Appendix present the rigorous argument , but be well read after Part 1 , in order that the assumption underlie the equation may be explicit .
the industry with which this model be concern be a basic industry , produce a substantial share of gross national product .
the form of the industry demand function be one which make quantity demand vary inversely with the product price , and vary directly with the level of Aj .
the industry of this model be so important that its wage and price policy be affect with a public interest .
because of its importance , and because the lack of price competition be well recognize , the industry be under considerable public pressure not to raise its price any more than could be justify by cost increase .
for the industry of this model , the effect of such public pressure in the past have be to hold the price well below the short - run profit - maximize price ( give the wage rate and the level of GNP ) , and even below the entry - limit price ( but not below average cost ) .
for such an industry , it be only ` ` safe '' to raise its price if such an increase be manifestly ` ` justify '' by rise cost ( due to rise wage , etc . ) .
thus , if public pressure set the effective limit to the price that the industry may charge , this pressure be itself a function of the wage rate .
the extent to which the public - limit price be raise by a give increase in the basic wage rate be itself a function of three thing : the passage of time , the level of GNP , and the size of the wage increase .
we be abstract from the fact of strike here , but it should be obvious that the extent to which the public - limit price be raise by a give increase in the basic wage rate be also a function of the show of resistance put up by the industry .
public indignation and resistance to wage - price increase be obviously much less when the increase be on the order of 3 % per annum than when the increase be on the order of 3 % per month .
public indignation and resistance to wage - price increase be obviously much less when the increase be on the order of 3 % per annum than when the increase be on the order of 3 % per month .
public indignation and resistance to wage - price increase be obviously much less when the increase be on the order of 3 % per annum than when the increase be on the order of 3 % per month .
we assume that average total unit cost in the relevant region of operation be constant with respect to quantity produce ( the average cost curve be horizontal , and therefore be identical with the marginal cost curve ) , and be the same for every firm ( and therefore for the industry ) .
the level of average cost ( equal to marginal cost ) be thus strictly a function of the wage rate .
for our present purpose we assume that the sole subject of bargaining be the basic wage rate ( not include productivity improvement factor or cost - of - living adjustment ) , and it be this basic wage rate which determine the level of cost .
productivity be something of an amorphous concept and the amount of productivity increase in a give time period be not even well known to the industry , much less to the union or to the public .
the existence of conflict and of vigorous union demand for an increase in money wage do not contradict the assumption that the union be willing to settle for cost - of - living and productivity - share increase as distinct from a cost - raise increase in the basic wage rate .
for internal political reason , the union ask for ( and accept ) increase in the basic wage rate , and would vigorously oppose a reduction in this rate , but the adjustment of the basic wage rate upwards be essentially up to the discretion of the company of the industry .
change in the basic wage rate be cost - raising , and they constitute an argument for raise price .
in this model , then , the industry be presume to realize that they could successfully resist a change in the basic wage rate , but since such a change be the only effective mean to raise price they may , in circumstance to be spell out in Part 2 , below , find it to their advantage to allow the wage rise .
the presumption in the literature would appear to be that the basic wage rate would be unchanged in this case , on the ground that it be ` ` clearly '' not in the interest of the industry to raise wage gratuitously .
from this presumption it be an easy step to the conclusion that any observe increase in the basic wage rate must be due to union behavior different and more aggressive than assume in our model .
it be convenient to assume that the union - industry contract be of one year 's duration .
essentially this impose two condition : first , international law have to recognize and be compatible with an international political system in which a number of state be competitive , suspicious , and opportunistic in their political alignment with one another ; ;
in both respect , international law be europeanize .
political interference in Africa and Asia and even in Latin America ( though limit in Latin America by the special interest of the United States as express in the Monroe Doctrine , itself from the outset relate to european politic and long dependent upon the ` ` balance of power '' system in Europe ) be necessary in order to preserve both common economic value and the european ` ` balance '' itself .
More emphasis be put upon the fact that international law be the law of ` ` civilized nation '' ; ;
Wheaton state that the public law be essentially ` ` limit to the civilized and christian people of Europe or to those of european origin '' .
now , with virtually every writer , not only be the european origin of public law acknowledge as a historical phenomenon , but the rule thus establish by the advanced civilization of Europe be to be impose on other .
the european custom on which international law be base be to become , by force and fiat , the custom that other be to accept as law if they be to join this community as sovereign state .
the european custom on which international law be base be to become , by force and fiat , the custom that other be to accept as law if they be to join this community as sovereign state .
the difference be important , for although the old law of nation do cover relationship among sovereign , this be by no mean its exclusive domain .
his search be merely for rule that might limit his freedom of action .
first , and most obvious , be the grow nationalism and the tendency to regard the state , and the individual 's identification with the state , as transcend other tie of social solidarity .
national identification be not new , but it be accelerate in intensity and scope throughout Europe as new unification occur .
accord to the new theory , the nineteenth century corporate sovereign be ` ` sovereign '' in a quite new and different sense from his historical predecessor .
relate to , but distinguishable from , nationalism be the growth of democracy in one form or another .
particularly be this true when the norm previously apply be no long satisfactory to many , when custom be rapidly change as the force of the new productivity be harness .
the old way of do thing , which depend on a relatively stable community with stable idea deal with familiar situation , be no long adequate to the task .
the legislative mill have be grind ever since , and when its cumbersome process be no long adequate to the task , a limited legislative authority be delegate in one form or another , to the executive .
whereas the eighteenth century have be a time in which man seek justice , the nineteenth and twentieth have be century in which man be satisfied with law .
whereas the eighteenth century have be a time in which man seek justice , the nineteenth and twentieth have be century in which man be satisfied with law .
it be true that , initially , the task be to remove restriction that , it be think , inhibit the free flow of money , good , and labor ; ;
but even laissez - faire be a conscious policy .
however , the sovereign be not Hobbes ' absolute monarch but rather the parliamentary sovereign of Austin .
that business be free from governmental supervision and notion of morality which might clog the automatic adjustment of the free market ; ;
indeed , contract be the dominant legal theme of the century , the touchstone of the free society .
in fact , some -- Anzilotti be the principle example -- go so far as to say that all international law could be trace to the single legal norm , Pacta sunt Servanda .
in the first place the new doctrine bring a formal separation of international from municipal law , reject the early view that both be part of a universal legal system .
one result be to nationalize much that have be regard as the law of nation .
state be free to enact , within broad , though ( perhaps ) determinate limit , their own rule as to the application of foreign law by their court , to vary the law merchant , and to enact legislation with regard to many claim arise on the high sea .
the change be not quite so dramatic as it sound because in fact common norm continue to be invoke by municipal court and be only gradually change by legislation , and then largely in marginal situation .
if this seem arbitrary , its effect be to treat citizen of the District of Columbia equally with citizen of the state -- at the expense of expand a troublesome jurisdiction .
one purpose of the change be to attain sympathetic enforcement of right insure by the Civil War amendment against state interference .
this save for state adjudication , in the first instance , the two major area where federal injunction have be most obnoxious , but other area remain vulnerable .
whereas the early case turn rather narrowly upon the availability of adequate state remedy , the new emphasis be upon the nature of the state policy at issue .
the classic case be Railroad Commission v. Pullman .
on review the Supreme Court , via Mr. Justice Frankfurter , find southern racial problem ` ` a sensitive area of social policy on which the federal court ought not to enter unless no alternative to adjudication be open '' .
reluctant , as usual , to interpret state legislation -- such interpretation can only be a ` ` forecast rather than a determination '' -- Mr. Justice Frankfurter lead a unanimous court to vacate the injunction .
` ` the resource of equity be equal to an adjustment that will avoid the waste of a tentative decision as well as the friction of a premature constitutional adjudication '' .
temporary abstention , i.e. , postponement , be one thing ; ;
refusal to adjudicate be another .
to the extent that the jurisdictional principle of 1875 stand unmodified by subsequent legislation , federal equitable relief against state action must be available -- or so it seem to Mr. Justice Frankfurter .
a most revealing recent case be Textile Workers Union v. Lincoln Mills .
the Justice 's elaborate examination of the legislative history of the provision in question suggest that Congress ' purpose be merely to make union suable .
obviously , the goal here propose be the guide principle in Mr. Justice Frankfurter 's opinion -- to the extent that Congress leave the problem to judicial discretion .
to insure uniformity in the meaning of national law , however , state interpretation be subject to Supreme Court review .
the result , of course , would be that federal law inevitably would mean different thing in different state .
subject to certain constitutional restraint in favor of fair trial , each level of government be free to devise its own judicial procedure .
the result be that the plaintiff 's case be dismiss .
Justices Frankfurter and Jackson dissent : ` ` one state may cherish formality more than another , one state may be more responsive than another to procedural reform .
if a litigant choose to enforce a Federal right in a State court , he can not be hear to object if he be treat exactly as be plaintiff who press like claim arise under State law with regard to the form in which the claim must be state -- the particularity , for instance , with which a cause of action must be describe .
but the form in which the claim must be state need not be different from what the State exact in the enforcement of like obligation create by it , so long as a requirement do not add to , or diminish , the right as define by federal law , nor burden the realization of this right in the actuality of litigation '' .
another problem in the area of federal - state relationship be this : what constitute reversible error in a state decision ? ?
the conduct in question be a speech .
with respect to item such as these the provision of section 381(c ) , view in historical perspective , suggest a rule require survival , whether the item be beneficial or detrimental to the survive corporation .
a clearly recognize exception be a statutory merger or consolidation .
the Court say the purpose of the section be principally to spare the government the embarrassment and trouble of deal with several party , one of they a stranger to the claim , and to prevent traffic in claim , particularly tenuous claim , against the Government .
other exception be assignment for the benefit of creditor , corporate dissolution , transfer by descent , or transfer by subrogation .
a tax - free reorganization not comply with the merger or consolidation statute of the state involve be difficult to fit into an ` ` operation of law '' mold .
a recent case in point be Mitchell Canneries v. United States , in which a claim against the Government be transfer first from a corporation to a partnership , whose partner be former stockholder , and then to another corporation form by the partner .
a recent case in point be Mitchell Canneries v. United States , in which a claim against the Government be transfer first from a corporation to a partnership , whose partner be former stockholder , and then to another corporation form by the partner .
hold the final corporation entitle to sue on the claim , the Court cite the Seaboard , Novo Trading , and Roomberg case for the proposition that ` ` transfer by operation of law or in conjunction with change of corporate structure be not assignment prohibit by the statute '' .
the Court , nevertheless , rely on the Seaboard case and also mention that the shareholder of the two corporation be the same .
if the succession be a matter of public record , certificate of the Secretaries of State or other public official have custody of the document will suffice ; ;
if the succession be not of record , all document relate to such succession , properly certify , be require .
in a b reorganization , follow by a section 332 liquidation , those case which hold that section 203 be inapplicable to transfer in liquidation appear to permit the successor corporation to sue for refund of taxis pay by the transferor .
in fact , a cash purchase of a corporation 's stock follow by liquidation might also be an effective way to transfer a claim for refund if the Kimbell - Diamond doctrine be not apply to eliminate the intermediate step .
as state in Seaboard and numerous other case , the two primary reason for the enactment of section 203 of the United States Code be to prevent the Government from have to deal with more than one claimant and to prevent the assignment of meretricious claim on a contingent - fee basis .
in these circumstance the possibility of multiple or conflicting claim be exceedingly remote .
furthermore , in a c reorganization the continue interest of stockholder of the corporation which pay the tax must be great than be necessary in a statutory merger , to which the statute be clearly inapplicable .
furthermore , in a c reorganization the continue interest of stockholder of the corporation which pay the tax must be great than be necessary in a statutory merger , to which the statute be clearly inapplicable .
if the transferor have substantial asset other than the claim , it seem reasonable to assume no corporation would be willing to acquire all of its property in the dim hope of collect a claim for refund of taxis .
if such an unlikely transaction be to take place , it would more logically be accomplish by a stock purchase , follow by the prosecution of the claim by the wholly - own subsidiary , follow by liquidation .
in the rare case where a corporation 's only substantial asset , or its most important one , be a claim for refund , perhaps its transfer should not be permit , whether the reorganization take the form of a statutory merger or of the acquisition of asset for stock .
there may be certain item which be quite similar to a net operating loss carryover or operating deficit and whose right to survive a reorganization should perhaps be subject to the condition applicable to those item .
since this type of item be not in the statute when section 381 be enact in 1954 , one can not say with certainty what effect the enactment of that section should have .
probably the primary reason for special treatment of a net operating loss carryover be the unique opportunity it present for tax avoidance .
as a result , it be decide that a mail questionnaire send to a large number of company would be more effective in determine the general practice and opinion of small firm and in highlight some of the fundamental and recur problem of defense procurement that concern both industry and government .
there be also the question of whether the respondent base his answer on factual information and carefully consider judgment , or whether his answer be casual guess .
the research team be very mindful of these danger and limitation of a mail questionnaire .
the major section of the questionnaire ( see Appendix B ) be devote to the following : 1 .
the questionnaire provide a place for the name of the respondent but state that identification of the respondent be optional .
the research team be concern that response from firm in the state of Washington might not be typical of those throughout the country , or that the result might be different when no phone or personal follow - up be make .
the research team be concern that response from firm in the state of Washington might not be typical of those throughout the country , or that the result might be different when no phone or personal follow - up be make .
the objective of the study be to determine the opinion and practice of small firm sell to defense program .
the primary consideration in the compilation of this list be convenience in discuss the questionnaire with company officer .
it be compile as a control sample to determine if the opinion and practice of company on the list submit by the member of the Aerospace Industries Association be materially different from those of other small firm sell to defense program .
the code be key - punch into IBM punch card and verify .
the first step in processing be to analyze the return from Questions 1 , 2 , and 3 to determine whether the respondent be large business or small business , in accordance with the definition contain in ASPR Section 1 - 701 .
the first step in processing be to analyze the return from Questions 1 , 2 , and 3 to determine whether the respondent be large business or small business , in accordance with the definition contain in ASPR Section 1 - 701 .
the second step in processing be to compare the response from company on the AIA list with those from company on the TR list in order to determine whether it would be appropriate to merge the response for the purpose of the study .
the contestant in this economic struggle be the Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee ( AWOC ) of the AFL - CIO and the agricultural employer of the State .
inevitably , one side be pleased and the other displeased , regardless of how we rule .
this past year the pattern have be different : the organizing program have the full support of the AFL - CIO , which supply staff and money to the AWOC , as well as moral support .
leadership be experienced and skillful , and financial resource be significant .
regardless of where personal sympathy may lie as between the party , failure to recognize these change condition would be to ignore the fact of life .
as a result of these change condition , the impact of the organizational effort on agricultural labor - management relation have be much great than in the past .
to date , at least , the strategy of the AWOC have be selective ; ;
normally , because agricultural labor be not cover by unemployment insurance , we would not expect any issue to arise regard benefit payment under the trade dispute provision of the Unemployment Insurance Code , although such a situation be quite within the realm of possibility .
the pertinent regulation for our purpose be section 602.2 ( , ) , as follow :
no person shall be refer to a position the filling of which will aid directly or indirectly in fill a job which ( 1 ) be vacant because the former occupant be on strike or be be lock out in the course of a labor dispute , or ( 2 ) the filling of which be an issue in a labor dispute .
no person shall be refer to a position the filling of which will aid directly or indirectly in fill a job which ( 1 ) be vacant because the former occupant be on strike or be be lock out in the course of a labor dispute , or ( 2 ) the filling of which be an issue in a labor dispute .
but over and beyond the compelling need for a bind precedent decision , I be convinced that the decision of the Superior Courts which in effect nullify the Secretary 's Regulation be not a correct interpretation of the Secretary 's power under the Federal law .
the ramification of the issue be enormous .
the public interest be so dominant in such an issue that I can not be so presumptuous as to attempt to settle it by an administrative order base upon conclusion reach in a summary action in one or two Superior Courts in the State .
the impact of noncompliance under the Wagner - Peyser Act be clear : the withdrawal of some $ 11 million a year of administrative fund which finance our employment service program or , as a corollary , the taking over by the Federal Government of its operation .
thus far , the case which have come before the court have involve only the issue of referral where the job be vacant due to a strike -- condition ( 1 ) in the Regulation of the Secretary .
none have yet arise under condition ( 2 ) , relate to referral to job ` ` the filling of which be an issue in a labor dispute '' .
here the problem be essentially one of define the word ` ` fill '' .
he have advise I that the narrow interpretation be the proper one ; ;
that is , that if wage , for example , be the only issue in a labor dispute , and no worker have leave their job because of the dispute , we may continue to make referral .
a considerable amount of evidence exist to show that an unhappy and insecure child be not likely to do well in school subject .
emotional maturity be the result of many factor , the principal one be the experience of the first few year of the child 's life .
emotional maturity be the result of many factor , the principal one be the experience of the first few year of the child 's life .
however , the teacher who understand the influence of emotion on behavior may be highly influential in help pupil gain confidence , security , and satisfaction .
the follow generalization about the emotional characteristic of elementary - school child may be helpful .
among infant the pattern of emotional response be similar ; ;
during early childhood , child be more interested in the approval of their parent and teacher than they be in the approval of other child ; ;
in early childhood the choice of a companion be likely to be for another child of his own age or a year or two old , who can do the thing he like to do ; ;
by the time pupil reach the sixth grade , their ethical and moral standard be fairly well developed ; ;
indeed , a study of the individual child be an integral part of the work of the elementary - school teacher , rather than merely an additional chore .
it be easy for the teacher to rationalize that the child who be not achieve in accordance with his know ability be just plain lazy , or that the child who lack interest in school , who dislike the teacher , or who be overaggressive be a hopeless delinquent .
it be easy for the teacher to rationalize that the child who be not achieve in accordance with his know ability be just plain lazy , or that the child who lack interest in school , who dislike the teacher , or who be overaggressive be a hopeless delinquent .
the curriculum may be too difficult for some and too easy for other .
some school system provide write instruction to principal and teacher designate when certain information be to be record on cumulative record form and explain how the information be to be summarize and use .
some school system provide write instruction to principal and teacher designate when certain information be to be record on cumulative record form and explain how the information be to be summarize and use .
second , that both actual and pending desegregation be , with few exception , the product or result of court order .
the Report together with other information suggest that desegregation in the school be slow .
the action be a result of a court order , the citation for which ( and for other court action mention in this paper ) be take from the Summary Report for this Conference .
desegregation in Pulaski County be pende because of court order , although date of admission be not yet determined .
desegregation in Pulaski County be pende because of court order , although date of admission be not yet determined .
the record be clear that increase in school desegregation last year come largely as a result of a court order ; ;
knowledge that thousand of school district be involve and observation that school desegregation have occur in only a handful in 1959 - 1960 lead to a conclusion that desegregation - from - court - order be slow .
that reference in the Report be ` ` continuation of the trend toward an all - Negro school system '' , a remark apparently occasion by the increase of Negro school population from 74.1 per cent to 76.7 per cent .
from the Summary Report before we at this Conference , a number of problem be apparent .
correlatively , can we reduce the role of the district court , so that the action be that of the people of the community or other school district and not that of the law court ? ?
again the problem be how to get it do and in what form to offer the group relation education ; ;
can we help child adjust to ` ` image of other child '' when the latter be not actually present .
this question be an issue because it likely divide we into two camp -- those for or against pupil assignment .
in each instance the plaintiff be a private citizen .
and I have establish that the action of municipal , county , or state school board or board of education be small , infinitesimally small in comparison with the number of district .
be the requirement that the plaintiff be a person actually deny admission to a school a sound requirement ? ?
there be nonetheless considerable argument against the clause , soften though it be , on the ground that federal aid be so necessary to the public school .
or be this subject a matter of self - determination , a matter of state right or county right ? ?
or be this subject a matter of self - determination , a matter of state right or county right ? ?
the next question be whether board member favor their own social class in their role as educational policy - maker .
the few case of clear favoritism along social - class line be as likely as not to involve representative of the work class on the school board who favor some such practice as high wage for janitor rather than pay increase for teacher , and such issue be not issue of educational policy .
the few case of clear favoritism along social - class line be as likely as not to involve representative of the work class on the school board who favor some such practice as high wage for janitor rather than pay increase for teacher , and such issue be not issue of educational policy .
in general , it appear that trustee and board member attempt to represent the public interest in their administration of educational policy , and this be make easy by the fact that the dominant value of the society be middle - class value , which be generally think to be valid for the entire society .
there be currently a major controversy of public education in which group interest and value be heavily engaged .
the member of the educational profession have a major voice in the determination of educational policy , their position be strong in the university .
the answer to question such as these certainly depend to some extent upon the educator 's own social - class position and also upon his social history , as well as upon his personality and what he conceive his mission to be as an educator .
one upward - mobile teacher may be a hard taskmaster for low - class pupil because she want they to develop the attitude and skill that will enable they to climb , while another upward - mobile teacher may be a very permissive person with low - class pupil because he know their disadvantage and deprivation at home , and he hope to encourage they by friendly treatment .
one upward - mobile teacher may be a hard taskmaster for low - class pupil because she want they to develop the attitude and skill that will enable they to climb , while another upward - mobile teacher may be a very permissive person with low - class pupil because he know their disadvantage and deprivation at home , and he hope to encourage they by friendly treatment .
one social - class factor which play a large part in educational policy today be the fact that a great many school and college teacher be upward mobile from urban low - class and low - middle - class family .
one social - class factor which play a large part in educational policy today be the fact that a great many school and college teacher be upward mobile from urban low - class and low - middle - class family .
while this influence be a complex matter , depend upon personality factor in the individual as well as upon his social - class experience , there probably be some general statement about social - class background and educational policy that can be make with a fair degree of truth .
their experience be quite in contrast with that of child of upper- and upper - middle - class native - bear parent , who be more likely to regard education as good for its own sake and to discount the vocational emphasis in the curriculum .
legislator be one such group , and state legislator have major responsibility for educational legislation .
they generally vote so as to serve their own constituency , and if the constituency should be solidly middle class or solidly low class , they might be expect to vote and work for middle- or for low - class interest in education .
another public interest group be the commission of layman or educator which be appoint to study an educational problem and to make recommendation .
these people be practically always upper- or upper - middle - class person , who attempt to act in what they regard as the interest of the entire society .
these have an upper - middle - class leadership and a middle - class membership , with rare exception , where working - class parent be active in local p.-t.a. matter .
fifty year ago the general raising of the school - leave age to sixteen be an example of this movement .
the reaffirmation of american faith in the comprehensive high school , as express in the Conant study , be another indication of the liveliness of the ideal of maximize opportunity through the equalizing of educational opportunity .
the recent federal government 's student - loan program be another step in the direction of make high education more available to low - status youth .
here , the choice be that between the horn of a dilemma .
by all mean the most important distinction be that between those total - cost apportionment which superimpose a distribution of admittedly unallocable cost residue on estimate of incremental or marginal cost , and those other apportionment which recognize no difference between true cost allocation and mere total - cost distribution .
suffice it to say that the usefulness of the latter apportionment be questionable .
moreover , whereas in Interstate Commerce Commission parlance ` ` variable cost '' mean a cost deem to vary in direct proportion to change in rate of output , in the type of analysis now under review ` ` variable cost '' have be use more broadly , so as to cover cost which , while a function of some one variable ( such as output of energy , or number of customer ) , be not necessarily a linear function .
but the major portion of the total cost of a utility business be common or joint to all , or nearly all , class of customer ; ;
thus , during any give year ( a ) if the revenue from the residential service be $ 7,000,000 , ( b ) if the operating expense impute to this class of service come to $ 5,000,000 , and ( C ) if the net investment in ( or value of ) the plant and equipment deem devote to this service amount to $ 30,000,000 , the cost analyst will report that residential service , in the aggregate , have yield a return of $ 2,000,000 or 6 - 2/3 per cent .
but the practice be likely to be misleading , since it may seem to support a conclusion that , as long as the revenue from any class of service cover the impute operating expense plus some return on capital investment , however low , the rate of charge for this service be compensatory .
but the practice be likely to be misleading , since it may seem to support a conclusion that , as long as the revenue from any class of service cover the impute operating expense plus some return on capital investment , however low , the rate of charge for this service be compensatory .
needless to say , any such inference would be quite unwarranted .
since the company under review be supply what we be here regard as only one kind of service , we might suppose that the problem of total cost apportionment would be very simple ; ;
in fact , however , the problem be not so simple .
the simple division , and the one most frequently use ( with subdivision ) in gas and electric rate case , be a threefold division of the total operate and capital cost into ` ` customer cost '' , ` ` energy '' or ` ` volumetric cost '' , and ` ` demand '' or ` ` capacity '' cost .
if this threefold division of cost be to have its counterpart in the actual rate of charge for service , as it actually do have in some rate , there would result a three - part rate for any one class of service .
for example , the monthly bill of a residential consumer might be the sum of a $ 1 customer charge , a $ 5 charge for 250 kilowatt - hour of energy at
but what be the operational worth of a sociology which mimetically reproduce the idea of physical model ? ?
it have become painfully clear that the very attempt to make the language of social research free of value by erect mathematical and physical model , be itself a condition response to a world which pay a premium price for technological manipulation .
for if the small group notion involve the implicit claim that the phenomenon of sociological investigation be of atomic or subatomic proportion , the philosopher need to know the extent to which such entity be valid .
for if the small group notion involve the implicit claim that the phenomenon of sociological investigation be of atomic or subatomic proportion , the philosopher need to know the extent to which such entity be valid .
a parallel function for philosophy be the study of the relation between perception experientially receive and conception logically form .
271 - 307 ) indicate , that the concept of function in sociology have be build up from physiological and biological model , in which the notion of teleology , i.e. , metaphysical purpose , be central .
) functionalism as a sociological credo be , therefore , not a direct consequence of observation , but rather an indirect consequence of philosophical inference and judgment .
the purpose of this sort of philosophical study of sociology be not to tyrannize but to clarify the principle of social science .
it be absurd to speak of philosophy as a superior enterprise to sociology , since the former be a logical , rational discipline , where sociology be essentially descriptive and empirical .
but contrary to Whitehead , philosophy be not a synonym for Plato .
the use of philosophy as a logical clearing house be manifest to any approach that do not descend to pure sensationalism .
the notion of philosophy as Queen Bee may fit well with authoritarian mode of political ideology , but it have be note that the price of such an imperial notion of philosophy be the frustration and flagellation of the social science .
in the new situation , philosophy be able to provide the social science with the same guidance that mathematic offer the physical science , a reservoir of logical relation that can be use in frame hypothesis have explanatory and predictive value .
in this connection , it might be note that the theory of game be a mathematical discovery long before its use in political science be exploit .
but the forceful presentation of new issue for the science to work on be itself a monumental task .
the dissection of scientific theory , the examination of a theory from the vantage - point of language , epistemology , and ethic , be itself a distinct contribution to knowledge , no less so because of its removal from empirical research .
Bergson and Leroy announce that ` ` the secret be the center of a philosophy '' and thereafter a hundred follower declare secrecy a high verity .
for this division be but an abstract representation of the social struggle between mysticism and science .
the mystification of metaphysical system do not imply the demise of philosophy , only the close of a philosophic age which demand metaphysic to be rational and logical .
the threadbare notion that belief , unlike behaviour , be not subject to objective analysis , have place intuitive metaphysics squarely against the sociology of knowledge , since it be precisely the job of the sociology of knowledge to treat belief as social fact no less viable than social behaviour .
specifically , it will be ask whether the ` ` real '' question people ask be not the ` ` ultimate '' question that social science find itself impotent in the face of .
what then be the status of such question as : be society the ground of human existence or a means to an individual goal ? ?
as Simmel ( 1908 ) and Dilthey ( 1922 ) indicate , question of whether the value of life be individual or social be not question , but assertion of faith make to appear as legitimate question .
as Simmel ( 1908 ) and Dilthey ( 1922 ) indicate , question of whether the value of life be individual or social be not question , but assertion of faith make to appear as legitimate question .
for what concern all scientific discipline be precisely that which can be capture for the rational , i.e. , for the scientific determination of what in past age be consider ultimate and irrational .
uncertainty overcome itself be the precondition of the quest for new and more precise information about the world .
a degree of indefiniteness be a salutary condition for the growth of science .
to find a place for they in their theory of knowledge would require they to revise the theory radically , and yet that theory be what they regard as their most important discovery .
if it could be show that judgment of good and bad be not judgment at all , that they assert nothing true or false , but merely express emotion like ` ` Hurrah '' or ` ` Fiddlesticks '' , then these wayward judgment would cease from troubling and weary head could be at rest .
if it could be show that judgment of good and bad be not judgment at all , that they assert nothing true or false , but merely express emotion like ` ` Hurrah '' or ` ` Fiddlesticks '' , then these wayward judgment would cease from troubling and weary head could be at rest .
there be perhaps no value statement on which people would more universally agree than the statement that intense pain be bad .
the attempt fail : the animal be now dead .
the pain of the rabbit be not itself bad ; ;
if so , then it be clear that in say the suffering be bad we be not express our feeling only .
we be say that the pain be bad when and as it occur and before anyone take an attitude toward it .
the first argument be thus an ideal experiment in which we use the method of difference .
let we suppose that the animal do not in fact fall into the trap and do not suffer at all , but that we mistakenly believe it do , and say as before that its suffering be an evil thing .
on the positivist theory , everything I seek to express by call it evil in the first case be still present in the second .
in the only sense in which badness be involve at all , whatever be bad in the first case be still present in its entirety , since all that be express in either case be a state of feeling , and that feeling be still there .
in the only sense in which badness be involve at all , whatever be bad in the first case be still present in its entirety , since all that be express in either case be a state of feeling , and that feeling be still there .
and our question be , be such an implication consistent with what we mean ? ?
and our question be , be such an implication consistent with what we mean ? ?
if anyone ask we , after we make the remark that the suffering be a bad thing , whether we should think it relevant to what we say to learn that the incident have never occur and no pain have be suffer at all , we should say that it make all the difference in the world , that what we be assert to be bad be precisely the suffering we think have occur back there , that if this have not occur , there be nothing leave to be bad , and that our assertion be in that case mistaken .
if anyone ask we , after we make the remark that the suffering be a bad thing , whether we should think it relevant to what we say to learn that the incident have never occur and no pain have be suffer at all , we should say that it make all the difference in the world , that what we be assert to be bad be precisely the suffering we think have occur back there , that if this have not occur , there be nothing leave to be bad , and that our assertion be in that case mistaken .
on the theory before we , such relief would be groundless , for in that suffer itself there be nothing bad at all , and hence in its nonoccurrence there would be nothing to be relieve about .
the pain in itself be neutral ; ;
this way of escape be theoretically possible , but since it have grave difficulty of its own and have not , so far as I know , be urge by positivist , it be perhaps good not to spend time over it .
when we come upon the rabbit and make our remark about its suffering be a bad thing , we presumably make it with some feeling ; ;
the positivist be plainly right in say that such remark do usually express feeling .
the pathetic evidence be no long before we ; ;
and we be now so fatigued in body and mind that feeling be , as we say , quite dead .
it be as empty as the word ` ` Hurrah '' would be when there be no enthusiasm behind it .
when we repeat the remark that such suffering be a bad thing , the feeling with which we make it last week may be at or near the vanish point , but if we be ask whether we mean to say what we do before , we should certainly answer yes .
when we repeat the remark that such suffering be a bad thing , the feeling with which we make it last week may be at or near the vanish point , but if we be ask whether we mean to say what we do before , we should certainly answer yes .
broad and Ross have lately contend that this fitness be one of the main fact of ethic , and I suspect they be right .
my point be this : whether there be such fitness or not , we all assume that there be , and if we do , we express in moral judgment more than the subjectivist say we do .
whatever the unhappy inmate of such camp be like today , Dostoevsky 's companion be about as grim a lot as can be imagine .
whatever the unhappy inmate of such camp be like today , Dostoevsky 's companion be about as grim a lot as can be imagine .
but if that be true , why be any attitude more fitting than any other ? ?
would condemnation be fitting if , independently of the condemnation , there be nothing bad to condemn ? ?
in such a case , any attitude would be as fitting or unfit as any other , which mean that the notion of fitness have lose all point .
the injured german veteran be a former miner , twenty - four year old , who have be wound by shrapnel in the back of the head .
in any event , the extraordinary result of this injury be that he become ` ` psychically blind '' , while at the same time , apparently , the sense of touch remain essentially intact .
psychical blindness be a condition in which there be a total absence of visual memory - image , a condition in which , for example , one be unable to remember something just see or to conjure up a memory - picture of the visible appearance of a well - know friend in his absence .
this circumstance in the patient 's case plus the fact that his tactual capacity remain basically in sound work order constitute its exceptional value for the problem at hand since the evidence present by the author be overwhelming that , when the patient close his eye , he have absolutely no spatial ( that is , third - dimensional ) awareness whatsoever .
the necessary inference , as the author themselves interpret it , would seem to be this : ` ` ( ( 1 ) spatial quality be not among those grasp by the sense of touch , as such .
the underlying assumption , of course , be that only sight and touch enable we , in any precise and fully dependable way , to locate object in space beyond we , the other sense be decidedly inferior , if not totally inadequate , in this regard .
therefore , if the sense of touch be function normally and there be a complete absence of spatial awareness in a psychically - blind person when the eye be close and an object be handle , the conclusion seem unavoidable that touch by itself can not focus and take possession of the third - dimensionality of thing and that actual sight or visual representation be necessary .
therefore , if the sense of touch be function normally and there be a complete absence of spatial awareness in a psychically - blind person when the eye be close and an object be handle , the conclusion seem unavoidable that touch by itself can not focus and take possession of the third - dimensionality of thing and that actual sight or visual representation be necessary .
obviously , a satisfactory answer to the third question be imperative , if the argument be to get under way at all , for if there be any possibility of doubt whether the patient 's tactual sensitivity have be impair by the occipital lesion , any finding whatsoever in regard to the first question become completely ambiguous and fail altogether , of course , as evidence to establish the desire conclusion .
obviously , a satisfactory answer to the third question be imperative , if the argument be to get under way at all , for if there be any possibility of doubt whether the patient 's tactual sensitivity have be impair by the occipital lesion , any finding whatsoever in regard to the first question become completely ambiguous and fail altogether , of course , as evidence to establish the desire conclusion .
the answer the author give to it , therefore , be of supreme importance .
it be as follow : ` ` the usual sensitivity test show that the specific quality of skin - perceptiveness ( pressure , pain , temperature ) , as well as the kinesthetic sensation ( muscular feeling , feeling in the tendon and joint ) , be , as such , essentially intact , although they seem , in comparison with normal reaction , to be somewhat diminish over the entire body .
the author insist , however , that these abnormality in the sense of touch be due absolutely to no organic disorder in that sense faculty but rather to the injury which the patient have sustain to the sense of sight .
first of all , what be their evidence that the tactual apparatus be fundamentally undamaged ? ?
first of all , what be their evidence that the tactual apparatus be fundamentally undamaged ? ?
that is , he be unaware what kind of object they be or what their use be .
it seem clear , when one take into consideration the exceedingly defective eyesight of the patient ( we shall describe it in detail in connection with our second question , the one concern the psychical blindness of the patient ) , that he have to rely on his sense of touch much more than the usual portfolio - maker and that consequently that faculty be most probably more sensitive to shape and size than that of a person with normal vision .
and so the author conclude : ` ` the conduct of the patient in his every - day life and in his work , even more than the foregoing fact ( mention above under 1 ) , leave positively no room for doubt that the sense of touch , in the ordinary sense of the word , be unaffected ; ;
or , to put the same thing in physiological term , that the performance - capacity of the tactual apparatus , from the periphery up to the tactual center in the brain , -- that is , from one end to the other -- be unimpaired '' .
the meaning of this , as we shall see , be that he have no fund of visual memory - image of object as object ; ;
if , however , the figure to be discern be complicated , compose of several interlock subfigure , and so on , even the tracing process fail he , and he could not focus even relatively simple shape among its part .
therefore , his only recourse be to learn the shape all over again for each new visual experience of the same individual object or type of object ; ;
man , tree , automobile , house , and so on -- object continually confront in everyday life -- have each its characteristic blot - appearance and become easily recognizable , at the very beginning of tracing , by an inference as to what each be .
their world , again , be a still simple , traditional age which be only slowly begin to appreciate the complexity of life .
and perhaps an observer of the vase will not go too far in deduce that the outlook of their maker and user be basically stable and secure .
the ninth century be in its artistic work ` ` the spiritually free and most self - sufficient between past and future '' , and the love skill spend by its artist upon their product be a testimonial to their sense that what they be do be important and be appreciate .
the ninth century be in its artistic work ` ` the spiritually free and most self - sufficient between past and future '' , and the love skill spend by its artist upon their product be a testimonial to their sense that what they be do be important and be appreciate .
geometric pottery have not yet receive the thorough , detailed study which it deserve , partly because the task be a mammoth one and partly because some of its local manifestation , as at Argos , be only now come to light .
the general intellectual outlook which have appear in the eleventh century be now consolidate to a significant degree .
these local variation be to become ever sharp in the next century and a half .
many aspect of civilization be not yet sufficiently crystallize to find expression , nor could the simple economic and social foundation of this world support a lofty structure .
what we have see in this chapter , we have see only dimly , and yet the result , however general , be worth the search .
to interpret , indeed , the era from 1000 to 800 as a period mainly of consolidation may be a necessary but unfortunate defect bear of our lack of detailed information ; ;
the ceramic material of the age be more abundant , more diversified , and more indicative of the hope and fear of its maker , who begin to show scene of human life and death .
since writing be practice in the Aegean before the end of the century , we may hope that the detail of tradition will now be occasionally useful .
the Dipylon Geometric pottery of Athens and the Iliad be amazing manifestation of the inherent potentiality of greek civilization ; ;
but both be among the last product of a phase which be end .
greek civilization be swirl toward its great revolution , in which the develop quality of the hellenic outlook be suddenly to break forth .
the revolution be well under way before 700 B.C. , and premonitory sign go back virtually across the century .
the era , however , be Janus - face .
the dominant pottery of the century be Geometric ; ;
the modern student , who know what be to come next , be likely to place first the factor of change which be visible in the eighth century .
the grow contact between Aegean and Orient be also a phase which should be link primarily to the remarkable broadening of Hellenic culture after 750 .
the important point , however , be that these magnificent achievement , unlike those of later decade , be only incidentally influence by oriental model .
but artist now be ready to refine and elaborate their inheritance .
the row of animal and bird , in particular , suggest awareness of oriental animal frieze , transmit perhaps via syrian silver bowl and textile , but the specific form of these row on local vase and metal product be nonetheless greek .
though the spread of this type of decoration in the Aegean have not yet be precisely determined , it seem to appear first in the Cyclades , which be among the lead exporter of pottery throughout the century .
bullet be so thick , throw sand in his face , that he find it difficult to return the fire .
Word reach the company that the man behind these depredation be Manuel Gonzales , a man with many follower , include a number who be keep in line through fear of he .
the ten or more dangerous party single out for prosecution be still at large , and Pels realize that if these man entrench themselves in their adobe house , defend themselves through loophole , it would be most difficult to capture they .
if not , how long to order and what be the price '' ? ?
the final step be a vote for a $ 230,000 bond issue for the construction of a sewage system by the 1959 town meeting , later confirm by a two - third vote at a special town meeting June 21 , 1960 .
share of capital stock at $ 15 each in the latter company be payable at the Bank of Manchester or at various other Vermont bank .
the line soon live up to its name , as local message of moderate length could be send for a dime and the company be quickly able to declare very liberal dividend on its capital stock .
telegrapher at the Depot at this time be Aaron C. Burr and Mark Manley of ` ` Burr and Manley '' , dealer in lumber and dry good .
early equipment be very flimsy ; ;
operate in 1887 be the ` ` Valley Telegraph Line '' , officer of which be E. C. Orvis , president ; ;
operator be Arthur Koop and Norman Taylor .
during summer , business be so brisk that Mrs. Wilcox have two assistant and a messenger .
telephone wire from Louis Dufresne 's house in East Manchester to the dufresne lumber job near Bourn Pond be up about 1895 .
service run through Barnumville and to Bennington County town east of the mountain be in the hand of the ` ` Gleason Telephone Company '' in 1925 , but major supervision of telephone line in Manchester be with the New England Telephone and Telegraph Company , which eventually gain all control .
service run through Barnumville and to Bennington County town east of the mountain be in the hand of the ` ` Gleason Telephone Company '' in 1925 , but major supervision of telephone line in Manchester be with the New England Telephone and Telegraph Company , which eventually gain all control .
another veteran telephone operator be Edith Fleming Blackmer , who have be in the office forty year at the time of her death in 1960 .
within a month , call be up seventy per cent .
no record be available as to the date or extent of installation , but it may have be in 1896 .
the next step be construction by the Manchester Light and Power Company of a plant on the west bank of the Battenkill south of Union Street bridge .
the first director of the Manchester Light and Power Company be John Marsden , M. L. Manley , William F. Orvis , George Smith , and John Blackmer .
the officer be John Marsden , president ; ;
with respect to this view , two point be worth make .
it also overlook the fact that in a rational lexicon , and quite clearly in More 's lexicon , the opposite of serious be not gay but frivolous , and the opposite of gay be not serious but solemn .
it also overlook the fact that in a rational lexicon , and quite clearly in More 's lexicon , the opposite of serious be not gay but frivolous , and the opposite of gay be not serious but solemn .
more believe that a man could be both serious and gay .
that a writer who be gay can not be serious be a common professional illusion , sedulously foster by all too many academic who mistakenly believe that their frivolous effort should be take seriously because they be express with that dreary solemnity which be the only mode of expression their author be capable of .
that a writer who be gay can not be serious be a common professional illusion , sedulously foster by all too many academic who mistakenly believe that their frivolous effort should be take seriously because they be express with that dreary solemnity which be the only mode of expression their author be capable of .
but to return to the main line of our inquiry , it be doubtful that Utopia be still widely read because More be medieval or even because he be a martyr -- indeed , it be likely that these day many who read Utopia with interest do not even know that its author be a martyr .
similar literary exercise be the common doing of a christian humanist of the first two decade of the sixteenth century .
have More 's writing be wholly limit to such exercise , they would be almost as dimly remember as those of a dozen or so other author live in his time , whose work tenuously survive in the mind of the few hundred scholar who each decade in pursuit of their very specialized occasion read those work .
the medieval be the most important to Chambers because he seek to place Thomas more , the author of Utopia , in some intelligible relation with St. Thomas more , the martyr .
to other whose concern it be to penetrate the significance of Christian Humanism , the Renaissance element be of primary concern .
to that question the answer be simple ; ;
but although the idea of communism be very old even in More 's day and do not spring full - clothe from his imagination in 1515 , it be not communism as such that we be concerned with .
perhaps one way to sharpen our sense of the modernity of utopian communism be to contrast it with the principal early type of communistic theory .
in Plato 's Republic communism be -- to speak anachronistically -- a communism of Janissaries .
its function be to separate from the base rule mass , among whom private ownership prevail , the govern warrior elite .
in More 's Utopia communism be not a means of separate out a warrior elite from the lumpish mass .
the concern of Utopia be with the optimo reipublicae statu , the good ordering of a civil society ; ;
to derive utopian communism from the Jerusalem Christian community of the apostolic age or from its medieval successor - in - spirit , the monastic community , be with an appropriate shift of adjective , mislead in the same way as to derive it from Plato 's Republic : in the Republic we have to do with an elite of physical and intellectual athlete , in the apostolic and monastic community with an elite of spiritual and religious athlete .
the apostolic community be literally an elite : choose by Christ himself .
it do not serve to contrast the exist order of society with a possible alternative order , because the age of innocence be not a possible alternative once man have sin .
` ` the soil be common to all man .
indeed , of all that be his every man be by nature and reason and therefore by conscience obligate to regard himself as a custodian .
in contrast to this stoic - patristic view , Utopia imply that the nature of man be such that to rely on individual conscience to supply the deficiency of municipal law be to embark on the bottomless sea of human sinfulness in a sieve .
but to say that at a moment in history something be new be not necessarily to say that it be modern ; ;
although utopian communism be both new in 1516 and also modern , it be not modern communism or even modern socialism , as they exist or have ever exist in theory or in practice .
whatever the merit of its intent , utopian communism be far too naive , far too crude , to suit any modern socialist or communist .
what that spirit and attitude be we can well understand if we see more precisely how it contrast with the communist tradition with the long continuous history , the one which reach Christianity by the way of Stoicism through the Church Fathers of Late Antiquity .
the Providence Daily Journal answer the Daily Post by state that the raid of John Brown be characteristic of democratic act of violence and that ` ` he be act in direct opposition to the Republican Party , who proclaim as one of their cardinal principle that they do not interfere with slavery in the state '' .
the Providence Daily Post think that there be probably good reason for the haste in which the trial be be conduct and that the only thing gain by a delay would be calm feeling .
the Providence Daily Journal state that although the guilt of Brown be evident , the South must guarantee he a fair trial to preserve domestic peace .
the editor 's main criticism of the trial be the haste with which it be conduct .
in the eastern section of the state the newspaper ' reaction to Brown 's trial and sentence be basically identical .
J. Wheaton Smith , editor of the Warren Telegraph state that ` ` the end of justice must be satisfied , a solitary example must be set , in order that all those misname philantropist , who , actuate by a blind zeal , dare to instigate riot , treason , and murder , may heed it and shape their future course accordingly '' .
if it fail on occasion to elect its candidate for general state office by majority , the failure be due to a linger remnant of the Know - Nothing party , which call itself the american republican party .
the Providence Daily Post 's editor write that he could not believe that a meeting honor Brown be to be hold in Providence .
the first speaker be Amos C. Barstow who have be unanimously choose president of the meeting .
the next speaker be George T. Day .
his deed be not below , but above the law '' .
the fourth and last speaker be Thomas Davis .
he say that the propriety or impropriety of such a gathering be a question that be to be settle by every man in accordance with the conviction of private judgment .
on the morning follow the Pratt Hall meet the editor of the Providence Daily Journal write that although the meeting be milder and less extreme than those hold in other area for similar purpose , it could have be avoid completely .
rather than be deceive , the eye be puzzle ; ;
( it make no real difference that Braque 's collage be on paper and eke out in charcoal , while Picasso 's be on canvas and eke out in oil .
the actual surface become both ground and background , and it turn out -- suddenly and paradoxically -- that the only place leave for a three - dimensional illusion be in front of , upon , the surface .
and it be as if the only stable relation leave among the different part of the picture be the ambivalent and ambiguous one that each have with the surface .
and independent silhouette be apt to coincide with the recognizable contour of the subject from which a picture start ( if it do start from a subject ) .
as it affect the city 's fiscal situation , such an interchange be ruinous ; ;
freeway boost valuation less ( because the garage they require be not prime building by a long shot ) , and reduce the acreage that can be tax .
less ambitious freeway plan may be more successful -- especially when the roadway and interchange be raise , allow for cross access at many point and provide parking area below the ramp .
the appeal of the suburb be particularly strong for heavy industry , which must move bulky object along a lengthy assembly line and want enough land area to do the entire job on one floor .
to light industry , the economy of be on one floor be much slighter , but efficiency engineer usually believe in they , and manufacturer look for way to cut cost can not be prevent from turn to efficiency engineer .
this movement of industry away from the central city be not so catastrophically new as some prophet seem to believe .
the ` ` leapfrog '' be a phenomenon of the railroad and the steam turbine , and the time when the belt of residence surround the old factory area be not yet blight .
the railroad siding be still important -- it be usually , though not always , true that long - haul shipment by rail be cheap than trucking .
the railroad siding be still important -- it be usually , though not always , true that long - haul shipment by rail be cheap than trucking .
and there be now many million of worker for whom the factory with the big parking lot , which can be reach by drive across or against the usual pattern of rush hour traffic and grille - route bus line , be actually more convenient than the walk - to factory .
the drive along Massachusetts ' Route 128 , the by - pass which make an arc about twenty mile from downtown Boston , may be a vision of the future .
the future could be bad .
while the factory be always the center of the labor market , they be often on the city 's periphery .
even the loss of hotel business to the outskirt 's motel have be relatively painless ; ;
what hurt most be the damage the automobile have do to central - city retailing , especially in those city where public transit be feeble .
but whenever a major purchase be contemplate forty year ago -- a new bedroom set or a winter coat , an Easter bonnet , a bicycle for Junior -- the family set off for the downtown department store , where the selection would be greatest .
these store be still there , but the volume of the ` ` downtown store '' have be on a relative decline , while in many city the suburban ` ` branch '' sell more and more dry good .
these store be still there , but the volume of the ` ` downtown store '' have be on a relative decline , while in many city the suburban ` ` branch '' sell more and more dry good .
the fact seem to be that very many large branch store be uneconomical , that the choice of location in the suburb be as important as it be downtown , and that even highly suburbanize city will support only so many big branch .
the fact seem to be that very many large branch store be uneconomical , that the choice of location in the suburb be as important as it be downtown , and that even highly suburbanize city will support only so many big branch .
moreover , the cost of operation be always high in any new store , as the conservative banker who act as controller for retail giant be begin to discover .
just as the suburban factory may be more convenient than the downtown plant to the worker with a car , the trip to the shopping center may seem far easy than to the downtown department store , though both be the same distance from home .
just as the suburban factory may be more convenient than the downtown plant to the worker with a car , the trip to the shopping center may seem far easy than to the downtown department store , though both be the same distance from home .
Raymond Vernon report that resident of East St. Louis have be drive across the Mississippi , through the heart of downtown St. Louis and out to the western suburb for major shopping , simply because parking be easy at the big branch than it be in the heart of town .
and if the affection for the suburban branch reflect a desire to shop with ` ` nice people '' , rather than with the indiscriminate urban mass which support the downtown department store , the central location may be in serious trouble .
the downtown store continue to offer the great inducement of variety , both within its gate and across the street , where other department store be immediately convenient for the shopper who want to see what be available before make up her mind .
Department store be build on dry good , especially lady ' fashion , and in this area , in the long run , the suburban branch will be hard put to compete against downtown .
if this analysis be correct , the suburban branch will turn out to be what management 's cost accountant refuse to acknowledge , marginal operation rather than major factor .
historically in America the appeal of city have be their color and life , the variety of experience they offer .
only a radical change in the nature of the population in the central city would be likely to destroy this preference -- and we must now turn our attention to the question of whether such a change , gloomily foresee by so many urban diagnostician , be actually upon we .
only a radical change in the nature of the population in the central city would be likely to destroy this preference -- and we must now turn our attention to the question of whether such a change , gloomily foresee by so many urban diagnostician , be actually upon we .
the artistic generation after Brumidi be train in the Paris of that time to a more meticulous standard of execution , and tend to overlook greatness of conception where fault and weakness be easy to find .
the descent may be remote , but this be surely the only full - scale example of that vigorous inheritance in the United States .
the scaffolding , a confusion of heavy beam hang from the gallery above , be strong and safe , but obscure visibility .
the scaffold be the length of the space to be paint .
what bit of Brumidi and Costaggini could be reach at either end seem in good order , though the roughish sandy surface be thick with dust .
painting ` ` a secco '' be much in evidence .
this brown be sometimes so rich in medium as to appear to be oil paint .
the mortar be three part sand to two of lime .
other pigment be mostly raw umber , some burn umber , and a little yellow ochre .
on the right be the Brumidi Liberty group , as it look after clean operation , which have not yet come around to the other end ; ;
one be lead to speculate as to why the empty space be there , leave for our century to finish .
in part a repeat sponging be need , but everywhere we find that water alone be enough to restore the original brightness .
the plaster be sound , the intonaco firmly attach all over , and the pigment solidly incorporate with it in all but a few unimportant place .
the great source of trouble be rain which have repeatedly flow from opening above , soak the surface and leave streak of dissolve lime , very conspicuous even after clean , particularly in the ` ` landing of Columbus '' , ` ` Oglethorpe and the Indians '' , and ` ` Yorktown '' .
this letter might not have be necessary have our effort to meet and talk with you be more successful .
this letter might not have be necessary have our effort to meet and talk with you be more successful .
if this attitude be seriously question in the Soviet Union , it do not necessarily follow that the majority of the society in which I live be too aware of the necessity for clarity on this ethical as well as aesthetic point of view .
difficult as it may have be at time , Pozzatti and I see enough , talk to enough artist , historian and other to realize that the issue be quite clear .
artist and poet be the raw nerve - end of humanity ; ;
they be small in number and their contribution be not immediately decisive in everyday life .
if we thus spend our very first day in the midst of a large number of your people honor a new hero and a great national achievement , our last day , to we at least , be equally impressive and very moving , even though the crowd be absent and there be almost complete silence .
when I speculate on one such occasion that the new growth , like other mutation , might be unable to propagate , I be immediately accuse of preach racial prejudice .
I could not bring myself to answer that ` ` some of my good friend be non - propagating mule '' .
unfortunately she return later , just as I have take advantage of the friendly atmosphere in the room by state that perhaps an unexpected result of the Cultural Exchange Program would be the re - emergence of Abstract Art in Russia , with Social Realism regain dominance in the U.S. .
she do not go so far as to say , as be do on other occasion , that abstraction as well as Impressionism be a russian invention that have be discard as unwanted by the people of the U.S.S.R.
to have one 's intention deliberately or unintentionally misunderstood be always a waste of time .
the following be a statement read to a large and friendly group of your fellow artist in Leningrad :
your past history be resplendent with the fruit of the intellect .
your present history be equally admirable for its industrial and scientific achievement .
its scope be as broad as the question : what do it mean to live in modern society ? ?
such book be easy prey for critic .
nor need the critic be captious .
despite its rather long intellectual history , alienation be still a promising hypothesis and not a verified theory .
what be miss be work that would answer , presumably by the use of survey method and guttman - type attitude scale , such question as these : what be the component of the feeling - state describe as alienation ? ?
how widespread be alienation ? ?
what be its incidence among the various class and subgroup of the population ? ?
take alienation as a dependent variable , with what socio - structural factor be it most highly associate ? ?
until such work be do , there must remain the nagging suspicion that alienation may be little more than an expression of the malaise of the intellectual , who , reject by and in turn reject the large society , project his own fear and despair onto the broad social screen .
nor do I think that alienation be nothing more than a projection of the malaise of the intellectual .
another example be his very infrequent use of the large amount of datum from survey design to discover what and how people actually do feel and think on a broad range of topic : he cite such survey - type finding just three time .
moreover , the conclusion he draw from the finding be not always the only one possible .
in the second study , the percentage be 86 for professional , 74 for managerial person , 42 for commercial employee , 56 for skilled worker , and 48 for semi - skilled worker .
start from other value premise than Fromm 's , some analyst might conclude that the percentage really tell we very little at all , while other might even conclude that the figure be remarkably low .
what matter be that while Fromm 's reading of the datum be not the only one possible , it be precisely the one we would expect from a writer who earnestly believe that every man can and ought to be happy and satisfied .
Fromm say these datum show that job dissatisfaction and resentment be widespread .
or , he might remind Fromm that the 41 per cent figure be really astonishingly low : after all , the medieval guild system be dedicate to the proposition that 100 per cent of the worker ought to turn out only the average amount ; ;
` ` be people happy , be they as satisfied , unconsciously , as they believe themselves to be ? ?
the point be that in a system such as Fromm 's which recognize unconscious motivation , and which rest on certain ethical absolute , empirical datum can be use to support whatever proposition the writer be urge at the moment .
this sort of manipulation be especially troublesome in Fromm 's work because , although his system be derive largely from certain philosophic conviction , he assert that it be base on empirical finding draw both from social science and from his own consulting room .
furthermore , the list be interesting for its omission .
it omit , for example , practically the whole line of great nineteenth century english social critic , nearly all the great writer whose basic position be religious , and all those who be with more or less accuracy call Existentialists .
the only other one I shall mention here be his use of the term capitalism .
for Fromm , capitalism be the enemy , the root of all evil .
piman be an old man , weak in body -- his voice rarely rise to a full forte -- but firm and clear of mind .
their begging song might easily be a folk melody :
apparently their origin be humble , their approach to life direct and unsophisticated .
the phrasing be irregular , and the abrupt key change have a primitive forcefulness .
a clever naturalistic touch be Varlaam 's labored reading of the warrant .
Rangoni 's first entrance be a musical shock , a sudden open fifth in a key totally unrelated to what have precede it .
the effect be as if he have materialize out of nowhere .
curiously , this scene be a close parallel to one that Verdi be write at the same time , the scene between Amonasro and Aida .
Rangoni and Amonasro have the same purpose -- force the girl to charm the man she love into serve her country 's cause -- and their tactic be much the same .
her pride be as much at stake as her virtue ; ;
the combine threat of hell - fire and ugliness be too much for she , and she fall terrify at his foot .
the most unusual feature of Boris , however , be the use of the great character of all , the chorus .
the conflict be not Boris versus Grigori or Shuiski or even the ghost of the murder child , but Boris versus the russian people .
we have a brief glimpse of the Tsar 's public personality , the ` ` official Boris '' , but our real focus be on the excitement of the crowd -- a significant contrast with its halfhearted acclamation in the opening scene , its bitter resentment and fury in the final act .
one reason for the unique vitality of the chorus be its great variety in expression .
this final reminder of his guilt be the fatal one .
the mayhem in the forest of Kromy be a natural sequel .
the service be over , and a number of people come from the church with their spokesman Mityukh in the lead .
so far these remark , like most criticism of Hardy , have tacitly assume that his poetry be all of a piece , one solid mass of verse express a sensibility at a single stage of development .
this be not , however , the case , and development be a term which we can apply to Hardy only in a very limited sense .
the ` ` sober opinion '' of his letter to Noyes , write when Hardy be eighty year old , be essentially that of his first ` ` philosophical '' notebook entry , make when he be twenty - five : ` ` the world do not despise we : it only neglect we '' ( Early Life , p. 63 ) .
there be only one hardy style , but in the early poem that style be only intermittently evident , and when it be not , the style be the style of another poet , or of the fashion of the time .
there be only one hardy style , but in the early poem that style be only intermittently evident , and when it be not , the style be the style of another poet , or of the fashion of the time .
the bad early poem be bad Shakespeare or bad Swinburne ; ;
the bad late poem be bad hardy .
these date be virtually the only clue we have to the chronology of the poem , since the separate volume be neither chronological within themselves nor in relation to each other .
these date be virtually the only clue we have to the chronology of the poem , since the separate volume be neither chronological within themselves nor in relation to each other .
the dated poem suggest that while Hardy 's concern with poetry may have be constant , his production be not .
the dated poem suggest that while Hardy 's concern with poetry may have be constant , his production be not .
he have two productive period , one in the late 1860 's , the other in the decade from 1910 to 1920 ( half of the date poem be from the latter period , and these alone total about one - tenth of all Hardy 's poem ) .
satire of circumstance and Moments of Vision , come during his most productive decade , be relatively self - contain ; ;
the last three volume be again more dependent on the past , as Hardy 's creative power decline in his old age .
the range of the later poetry be considerably narrow , but the number of successful poem be far great .
the range of the later poetry be considerably narrow , but the number of successful poem be far great .
the language be the conventional language of the form ; ;
the detail of the setting of ` ` Neutral Tones '' be not , strictly speak , metaphorical , but they combine to create a mood which be appropriate both to a dismal winter day and to the end of love , and in this way love and weather , the emotion and the element , symbolize each other in a way that be common to many of Hardy 's good poem ( ` ` Weathers '' , ` ` the Darkling Thrush '' , and ` ` during wind and Rain '' , for example ) and to some move passage in the novel as well ( far from the Madding Crowd be full of scene construct in this way ) .
in ` ` Revulsion '' , on the other hand , the pessimism be a case not prove ; ;
Hardy obviously feel that these poem be peculiarly personal and private ; ;
the elegiac tone be Hardy 's natural tone of voice , and it be not surprising that the 1912 - 13 poem be consistently and unmistakably his .
the elegiac tone be Hardy 's natural tone of voice , and it be not surprising that the 1912 - 13 poem be consistently and unmistakably his .
the view be always toward the past ; ;
but the mood be not quite nostalgic -- Hardy would not allow sentiment to soften his sense of the irredeemable pastness of the past , and the eternal deadness of the dead .
the poem be , the epigraph tell we , the ` ` trace of an ancient flame '' ; ;
the fire of love be dead , and Hardy stand , as the speaker do in the last poem of the sequence , over the burn circle of charred stick , and think of past happiness and present grief , honest and uncomforted .
both of they be my friend .
the principal theme of Thomas 's poetry be the ambivalence of birth and death -- the pain of blood - stain creation .
music , of course , be not so explicit an art , but anybody who know Charlie Parker know that he feel much the same way about his own gift .
the difference be that Horace accept his theme with a kind of silken assurance .
art may have be for he the most enduring , orderly , and noble activity of man .
their effect be only superficially startling .
the metaphysical conceit , which fascinate the Reactionary Generation still dominant in backwater american college , be embroidery .
the immediate theme , if it exist , be incidental , and his main theme -- the terror of birth -- be simply reiterate .
his sinuous melody be a sort of naive transcendence of all experience .
he may have be eccentric in his behavior , but his painting be as impassive as persian tile .
partly this difference be due to the nature of verbal communication .
technique pure and simple , rendition , be not of major importance , but it be interesting that Parker , follow Lester Young , be one of the leader of the so - call saxophone revolution .
metrically , Thomas 's verse be extremely conventional , as be , incidentally , the verse of that other tragic enrage , Hart Crane .
a poem by Dylan Thomas , a saxophone solo by Charles Parker , a painting by Jackson Pollock -- these be pure confabulation as end in themselves .
just as Hart Crane have little influence on anyone except very reactionary writer -- like Allen Tate , for instance , to whom Valery be the last word in modern poetry and the felicity of an Apollinaire , let alone a Paul Eluard be nonsense -- so Dylan Thomas 's influence have be slight indeed .
in fact , his only disciple -- the only person to imitate his style -- be W. S. Graham , who seem to have imitate he without much understanding , and who have since move on to other method .
in fact , his only disciple -- the only person to imitate his style -- be W. S. Graham , who seem to have imitate he without much understanding , and who have since move on to other method .
Thomas 's principal influence lie in the communication of an attitude -- that of the now extinct british romantic school of the New Apocalypse -- Henry Treece , J. F. Hendry , and other -- all of whom be quite conventional poet .
in fact , the whole generation of the found father of bop -- Gillespie , Monk , Davis , Blakey , and the rest -- be just now at a considerable discount .
the point be that many of the most impressive development in the art nowadays be aberrant , idiosyncratic .
a Tiepolo painting , however confabulate , be a universe of tension in vast depth .
in fact , once the size be big enough to cover a whole wall , it turn into nothing more than extremely expensive wallpaper .
nothing in all this be autobiographical : unlike the poet of Deor and Widsith , the poet of Beowulf be not concern with his own identity ; ;
nothing in all this be autobiographical : unlike the poet of Deor and Widsith , the poet of Beowulf be not concern with his own identity ; ;
Milman Parry rigorously defend the observation that the extant Homeric poem be largely formulaic , and be lead to postulate that they could be show entirely formulaic if the complete corpus of Greek epic survive ; ;
the bondage endurable by an oral poet be to be estimate only by a very skilful oral poet , but it appear safe to assume that no sustained narrative in rhyme could be compose without extreme difficulty , even in a language of many terminal inflection .
the verse of Beowulf or of the Iliad and the Odyssey be not easy to create but be not impossible for poet who have develop their talent perforce in earn a livelihood .
yet certain aid be valuable and quite credibly necessary for recite long stretch of verse without a pause .
even though the bondage of his verse be not so great as the writing poet can manage , it be still great enough for he often to be seriously impede unless he have aid to facilitate rapid composition .
the quest of the historical Homer be likely never to have further success ; ;
this observation be of interest not only to student of Homeric poetry but to student of anglo - saxon poetry as well .
to the extent that a tale be twice tell , its final author must be suspect , although plagiarism in an oral tradition be less a misdemeanor than the standard modus dicendi .
to the extent that a tale be twice tell , its final author must be suspect , although plagiarism in an oral tradition be less a misdemeanor than the standard modus dicendi .
with a few important and a few more unimportant exception , no expression can be deem le mot juste for its context , because each be very probably the only expression that long - establish practice and ease of rapid recitation would allow .
to the extent that a language be formulaic , its individual component must be regard as no more distinguished than other cliche .
W. F. Bryan suggest that certain kenning in Beowulf be select sometimes for appropriateness and sometimes for ironic inappropriateness , but such a view would appear untenable unless it be deny that the language of Beowulf be formulaic .
time - server , though the periphrastic expression be , they may nevertheless be handsome or ironic or humorous .
time - server , though the periphrastic expression be , they may nevertheless be handsome or ironic or humorous .
a long evolution in an oral tradition cause the poetic language of the heroic age to be base upon formula that show the important quality of thing , and these formula be therefore potentially rather than always actually accurate .
true , we do not know how they be regard in their day , but we need not believe the epic audience to have be more insensitive to the formula than the numerous scholar of modern time who have read Germanic or homeric poetry all their life and still find much to admire in occasional occurrence of the most familiar phrase .
reliance be therefore not to be place upon the archaeological particular in an oral poem ; ;
even when defenseless of weapon the Danes would be Gar - Dene ( as their king be Hrothgar ) and Priam would be eummelihs .
achille , like siegfrie in the Nibelungenlied , be potentially the swift of man and may accordingly be call swift - footed even when he stand idle .
the epic language be not entirely the servant of the poet ; ;
the poet 's intention be difficult to discern and , except to biographer , unimportant ; ;
the language , however , be a proper object of scrutiny , and the effect of the language be palpable even if sometimes inevitable .
the language , however , be a proper object of scrutiny , and the effect of the language be palpable even if sometimes inevitable .
this explanation be attractive , but be vitiate at least in part by the observation that Cynewulf , though he use kenning in the traditional manner , be a literate man who four time inscribe his name by rune into his work .
if Cynewulf be literate , the Beowulf poet may have be also , and so may the final redactor of the Iliad and the Odyssey .
other theory of origin be compatible with the formulaic theory : Beowulf may contain a design for terror , and the Iliad may have a vast hysteron - proteron pattern answer to a ceramic pattern produce during the Geometric Period in pottery .
thus one line in five from the Iliad and the Odyssey be to be find somewhere else in the two poem .
the ratio be thoroughly remarkable , because the line be so long -- half again as long as those of Beowulf .
the ratio be thoroughly remarkable , because the line be so long -- half again as long as those of Beowulf .
in determine the extent to which any poem be formulaic it be idle , however , to inspect nothing besides line repeat in their entirety , for a stock of line - fragment would be sufficient to permit the poet to extemporize with deftness if they provide for prosodic need .
if any word or phrase be formulaic , they will be .
he know instinctively that next to voice and face an actor 's hand be his most useful possession -- that in fiction as in the theatre , gesture be an indispensable shorthand for individualize character and dramatize action and response .
Pumblechook 's ` ` signature '' be the perpetually extend glad hand .
Old Mr. Pocket 's frantic response to life imprisonment with a useless , social - climb wife be to ` ` put his two hand into his disturbed hair '' and ` ` make an extraordinary effort to lift himself up by it '' , whereas Joe Gargery endure the shrewish onslaught of Mrs. Joe by apologetically draw ` ` the back of his hand across and across his nose '' .
such mannerism would be less worthy of remark , be it not that in Great Expectations , as in no other of Dickens ' novel , hand serve as a leitmotif of plot and theme -- a kind of unifying symbol or natural metaphor for the book 's complex of human interrelationship and the value and attitude that motivate they .
so it be with Great Expectations , whether the hand be Orlick 's as he strike down Mrs. Gargery or Pip 's as he steal a pie from her pantry .
later he flee in panic from the family table just as his theft be about to be discover and be block at the front door by a soldier who accusingly hold out a pair of handcuff which he have bring to Gargery 's forge for mending .
through such detail Dickens indicate at the outset that guilt be a part of the ironic bond between Pip and Magwitch which be so unpredictably to alter both their life .
since they commonly translate thought and feeling into deed , hand naturally represent action , and since nearly half the character in Great Expectations be of the underworld or closely ally to it , the linking of hand with crime or violence be not to be wonder at .
since they commonly translate thought and feeling into deed , hand naturally represent action , and since nearly half the character in Great Expectations be of the underworld or closely ally to it , the linking of hand with crime or violence be not to be wonder at .
this last ` ` rampage '' be only the prelude to the vicious blow upon her head , ` ` deal by some unknown hand '' whose identity be later reveal not verbally but through a manual action -- the tracing of Orlick 's hammer upon a slate .
the scarred , disfigured wrist of Mr. Jaggers ' housekeeper be the tell - tale mark of her sinister past , for her master , coolly exhibit they to his dinner guest , make a point of the ` ` force of grip there be in these hand '' .
it be the similarity between Estella 's hand and Molly 's ( ` ` the action of her finger be like the action of knitting '' ) that provide Pip with a vital clue to the real identity of both and establish a symbolic connection between the underworld of crime and the genteel cruelty of Satis House .
money , so important a theme elsewhere in Dickens , be here central , and hand be often associate in some way with the false value -- acquisitiveness , snobbery , self - interest , hypocrisy , toadyism , irresponsibility , injustice -- that attach to a society base upon the pursuit of wealth .
almost the first step in the corruption of Pip 's value be the unworthy shame he feel when Estella cruelly remark the coarseness of his hand : ` ` they have never trouble I before , but they trouble I now , as vulgar appendage '' .
incidentally , one can not miss the significance of this gesture , for Dickens reintroduce it associatively in Pip 's mind at another moral and psychological crisis -- his painful recognition , in a talk with Herbert Pocket , that his hopeless attachment to Estella be as self - destructive as it be romantic .
the label and operation column must be blank and the continuation of the operand must begin in column 21 ; ;
this table originally indicate that index word 1 through 96 and electronic switch 1 through 30 be available for assignment to symbolic reference ; ;
index word 97 through 99 be not available .
at the end of this pass , the table indicate which index word and electronic switch be not available for assignment to symbolic reference .
the initial setting of the availability table indicate that the index word or electronic switch be not available for assignment .
when the index word or electronic switch be reserve because of actual usage in the statement describe above , the position or order of the statement within the program be not important ; ;
when such a reference be find , an actual address be assign and the availability table be change so that the assign index word or switch be no long available for later assignment .
if the compiler find that there be no more electronic switch available for assignment , the warning message ` ` no More Electronic Switches Available '' will be place in the object program list , the table will be alter to show that electronic switch 1 through 30 be available , and assignment will continue as before .
as note in Appendix C , index word 97 through 99 be never available for assignment to symbolic name by the compiler ; ;
an RDW will be of the form Af , where xxxx be the start location of the area and yyyy be its end location .
the basic format of the dioc statement be as follow : anylabel be any symbolic label ; ;
the basic format of the dioc statement be as follow : anylabel be any symbolic label ; ;
this item may be a symbolic name or an actual one - digit or two - digit index word address in the range 3 - 94 .
this item may be a symbolic name or an actual one - digit or two - digit index word address in the range 3 - 94 .
since experience indicate that effluent from oxidation pond do not create major problem at these BOD concentration , the goal for the effluent quality of the accelerated treatment system be the same as from conventional oxidation pond .
the pilot plant be a circular lagoon 81 ft in diam at the surface and 65 ft in diam at the bottom , 4 ft below the surface , with a volume of 121,000 Aj .
the major contributor be a shopping center with house be add to the system as the subdivision develop .
initially , the wastewater would be entirely from the shopping center with the domestic sewage from the house increase over an 18 - month period .
the datum indicate that the organic load during the 6 - hr . composite be essentially 50 per cent of the 24 - hr . organic load .
a single 24 - hr . composite sample indicate that the sewage flow pattern and characteristic be typical .
needless to say , the organic load be very low on a volumetric basis , but be 270 lb BOD / day / acre on a surface loading basis .
it seem that the aerate lagoon be a very heavily load oxidation pond or a lightly load activate sludge system .
the average volatile suspend solid in the effluent be 75 mg / l while MLSS average 170 mg / l volatile suspend solid .
this low BOD be due to removal of the excess suspend solid by sedimentation since the only dilution be surface runoff which be very low during this study .
it be find that the aerate lagoon be an activate sludge system rather than an oxidation pond .
the floc particle be all small as the heavy floc settle out .
the predomination of free swimming ciliate protozoa be indicative of a high bacterial population .
the dissolve oxygen in the aeration unit be consistently high until January 29 , 1961 .
the polyethylene cover reduce the oxygen transfer rate by 10 per cent , indicate that the maximum oxygen transfer be at the rotor rather than through the surface .
the organic loading on the pond be slightly under 60 lb . BOD / day / acre .
thus , the three main category of antisubmarine warfare operation be defense of shipping , defense of naval force , and area defense .
submarine and shore installation be new element .
a sixth element , not always consider , be intelligence .
operational intelligence presumably will be available from our national intelligence agency ; ;
the major postwar development be the certainty that these element should not be consider singly but in combination and as be mutually support .
thus , the most productive area be not necessarily the most stressed .
the result can only be confusion in the public mind .
industry 's main criticism of the Navy 's antisubmarine effort be that it can not determine where any one company or industry can apply its skill and know - how .
the result , couple with the salesmanship for which american industry be famous , be considerable expenditure of fund and effort in marginal area .
the result , couple with the salesmanship for which american industry be famous , be considerable expenditure of fund and effort in marginal area .
some be also in Albania and other be on loan to Egypt .
logically , then , the first principle of the plan must be that it be not rigidly orient toward any geographical area .
therefore the second principle of the plan must be that , while provide for all - out hostility , its effectiveness be not dependent on general war .
therefore the second principle of the plan must be that , while provide for all - out hostility , its effectiveness be not dependent on general war .
initially , have few unit of some element -- especially submarine -- than the opponent , our capability need to be sufficiently great than theirs , so that the exchange will be in our favor .
therefore , the third principle of the plan must be that it do not depend for effectiveness on engagement by the same type , unless at an assured favorable exchange rate .
the next development will probably be in weaponry .
therefore , the fourth principle of the plan must be that it provide for continuously increase capability in the opponent .
therefore , the plan 's fifth principle must be that it capitalize on the capability of all element in combination .
number would be astronomical and current fiscal policy make this an impractical solution .
therefore , the sixth principle of the plan must be that it concentrate on current measure which will reduce future force requirement .
the seventh principle of the plan be self - evident ; ;
consequently , the system give area coverage ( if such coverage be less than world wide ) must be flexible and hence at least partially mobile .
consequently , the system give area coverage ( if such coverage be less than world wide ) must be flexible and hence at least partially mobile .
environmental intelligence be just as important .
temperature , wind , oxygen content , depth , bottom character , and animal life be the chief environmental variable .
progress in predict water condition be encouraging , but little guidance be available to the man at sea on the use of such information .
progress in predict water condition be encouraging , but little guidance be available to the man at sea on the use of such information .
a most attractive feature be that detection and attack be combine in a single package .
system cover the Gulf of St. Lawrence and possibly the entire coast of the United States be not impossible .
the proponent be scientific and technical man who exercise considerable influence on their military counterpart .
system which detect submarine over wide area be attractive , although they can be only ` ` burglar alarm '' .
mobile force be require to localize and attack detect target , since the system be not capable of pinpoint a target .
such system be expensive and be orient geographically .
but the submarine be a weapon of ambush and therefore always in danger of be ambush .
the inhibition of the enzyme by very low concentration of lanthanum ion be probably the strong know biological effect of rare earth salt .
it be observe that EWC macromolecule be the same diameter ( 15 a. ) but much long ( up to several micron ) than vertebrate tropocollagen .
experiment be in progress to develop ultraviolet spectrophotometric technique for assay these enzyme and for study their sensitivity to metal ion .
-- on the basis of a differentiability assumption in function space , it be possible to prove that , for material have the property that the stress be give by a functional of the history of the deformation gradient , the classical theory of infinitesimal viscoelasticity be valid when the deformation have be infinitesimal for all time in the past .
-- on the basis of a differentiability assumption in function space , it be possible to prove that , for material have the property that the stress be give by a functional of the history of the deformation gradient , the classical theory of infinitesimal viscoelasticity be valid when the deformation have be infinitesimal for all time in the past .
Gallium oxide be less volatile than silica ( the main constituent of tektite ) and germanium oxide be more volatile .
Gallium oxide be less volatile than silica ( the main constituent of tektite ) and germanium oxide be more volatile .
some of the previously report compound have thus be reformulate and a series of new hydrido and carbonyl compound discover , the more representative example be Af , Af , Af , Af and Af ( Af ) .
only uninterrupted sequence of the former be eligible for formation of crystallite .
the complex morphology of polycrystalline homopolymer be necessarily dependent on the same factor .
while ATP appear to be necessary for the occurrence of contraction , its presence and enzymatic hydrolysis of it by the muscle protein myosin be not the only criterion for contraction .
the preparation of such product be not new , but the system heretofore employ in polymerization have command considerable experimental skill and start material of a high purity .
since 1948 the work headquarters have be the Department of Geology and Mineralogy .
editor for Volumes 1 , and 2 , be M. W. Porter and the late R. C. Spiller , both of Oxford University .
the index be essentially a new treatment of previously compile morphological datum .
the publication form be that of clothbound book .
the two volume be available from the publisher for $ 16.80 and $ 28.00 , respectively .
preparation of a second edition be in progress under the sponsorship of the Crystal Data Committee of the American Crystallographic Association .
coeditor be J.D.H. Donnay , G. E. Cox of Leeds University , and Olga Kennard of the National Council for Medical Research , London .
future edition may be more critical .
a second edition be in preparation , and there be long range plan for a third .
the present edition of crystal datum ( Af ) , publish in 1954 as Memoir 60 of the Geological Society of America , be now out of print .
the manuscript of the second edition will probably be ready by the end of 1960 .
the author of Crystal Structures be Ralph W.G. Wyckoff , University of Arizona , Tucson , Arizona .
the aim be to state the result of all available determination of atomic position in crystal .
presumably the tabulate datum be well available value .
the critical comment in the textual section of this publication be invaluable .
the publication form be that of loose - leaf sheet ( Af ) contain in binder .
publisher of Crystal Structures be Interscience Publishers , 250 Fifth Avenue , New York 1 , N. Y. .
price of the complete work include all necessary binder be $ 148.50 .
the editor of this volume and volume 2 , be the late Charles Palache , Clifford Frondel , and the late Harry Berman , all of Harvard University .
volume 3 , be near completion and there be plan to revise volume 1 .
abstract and other compilation on rare occasion when original paper be not available .
) the two volume be available from the publisher for $ 14.00 and $ 16.00 , respectively .
the resident staff be large and consist of professional assistant , graduate student , abstractor , librarian , technical editor , machine operator , secretarial help , and other .
the aim be to collect a very broad range of physical , chemical , morphological , and structural datum for crystal on an encyclopedic scale and to seek all possible useful and reveal correlation of property with internal structure .
unpublished datum will be available to the Groth institute from cooperate group and individual .
critical evaluation of all datum compile be not a primary aim of this project .
the basic objective in each instance be to make available supply of food during the interval between harvesting or slaughter , to minimize loss result from the action of microorganism and insect , and to make it possible to transport food from the area of harvest or production to area of consumption .
an early hope that irradiation might be the ultimate answer to practically all food preservation problem be soon dispel .
the chief factor responsible for the spoilage of fresh foodstuff be ( 1 ) microorganism such as bacteria , mold , and yeast , ( 2 ) enzyme , ( 3 ) insect , ( 4 ) sprout , and ( 5 ) chemical reaction .
microorganism be often responsible for the rapid spoilage of food .
Insect infestation be a problem of importance chiefly in store grain .
deactivation of enzyme be also possible , although some type require extremely heavy dose of 10 Mrad or more .
the radiation dose require for the preservation of food be in the follow range : 1 .
a number of food be quite acceptable as regard taste and palatability , however , at dosage substantially less than sterilization level .
of the various particle accelerator , the Van De Graff machine , resonant transformer , and linear accelerator be the principal one available for commercial use .
cost of the effective energy produce by these source be a major obstacle in the development of food - preservation process .
conventional energy for processing food be available in the range of at most a few cent per kwhr for electric power and the equivalent of a few mill per kwhr for process steam .
radiation , therefore , be at an initial cost disadvantage even though only 1 to 10 per cent as much radiation energy as heat energy be require for radiopasteurization or radiosterilization .
what be the possibility of lower radiation production cost for the future ? ?
such projection , however , appear highly speculative and the capacity involve be far beyond those foresee for food - preservation facility .
because agricultural activity be seasonal and the area of production and harvest of many food be widely scatter geographically , and because of the high cost of transport bulk food item any substantial distance to a central processing location , the use of large central processing station , where low - cost radiation facility approach the megawatt range might be utilize , be inherently impracticable .
because agricultural activity be seasonal and the area of production and harvest of many food be widely scatter geographically , and because of the high cost of transport bulk food item any substantial distance to a central processing location , the use of large central processing station , where low - cost radiation facility approach the megawatt range might be utilize , be inherently impracticable .
the objective of complete sterilization of food be to produce a wholesome and palatable product capable of be store without refrigeration for extended period of time .
high nutritional value , variety , palatability , and appetizing appearance be important for reason of morale .
food for rear station , which require cooking , but no refrigeration , be also of interest .
commercial interest be chiefly in this type of treatment , as be military interest under peacetime condition .
commercial interest be chiefly in this type of treatment , as be military interest under peacetime condition .
to date , the one meat show favorable result at sterilization dose be pork .
of particular interest to the military service be the demonstration that roast pork , after radiosterilization , be superior in palatability to available can pork product .
test with beef have be largely unsuccessful because of the development of off - flavor .
a prime objective of the Army Quartermaster Corps program be to find the reason for beef 's low palatability and mean of overcome it , since it be a major and desirable dietary item .
off - flavor be a less severe problem with the radiopasteurization of meat , but problem of commercial acceptability remain .
however , a major problem here be one of scale of processing ; ;
the problem of color change by blanch and liquid accumulation within the package be the same as for solid cut .
the principal potential advantage would be that the finished product could be transport and store at low cost under refrigeration instead of be freeze .
competitive process for preserve meat be by can and freezing .
cost of can meat be in the range of 0.8 to 5 cent per pound ; ;
cost of freeze be in the area of 2 to 3.5 cent per pound .
radiopasteurization by either the electron accelerator or cesium-137 source be in the range of freeze cost .
irradiation use the nuclide source be more expensive than use of an electron accelerator .
result of irradiation test with poultry have be quite successful .
radiopasteurization have also be successful , and the shelf life of chicken can be extend to a month or more under refrigerate storage as compare with about 10 day for the untreated product .
acceptance of radiopasteurization be likely to be delay , however , for two reason : ( 1 ) the storage life of fresh chicken under refrigeration be become a minimal problem because of constantly improve sanitation and distribute practice , and ( 2 ) treatment by antibiotic , a measure already approve by the Federal Food and Drug Administration , serve to extend the storage life of chicken at a low cost of about 0.5 cent per pound .
fresh seafood product be extremely perishable .
although refrigeration have serve to extend the storage life of these product , substantially increase consumption might be possible if area remote from the seacoast could be serve adequately .
since the removal force be a function of coat thickness , a differential transformer pickup have be incorporate into the instrument to accurately measure film thickness .
the instrumental method , however , be about 100 time more sensitive and yield numerical result which can be accurately repeat at will over a period of time .
the molecular force hold the coating to the substrate be obviously great than the cohesive strength of the coating and failure occur by shear along a plane start at the tip of the knife and extend to the coat surface .
it can be see that the force be characteristic of the removal process and change abruptly from cut to crack to peel removal .
also , it can be readily see that the cutting and peel type of failure show a steady state response , while the cracking mechanism be of a dynamic nature .
presumably the interfacial bond strength and gross cohesive property be identical in each case .
the action and reaction force be r and Af , respectively , and be equal and opposite in direction .
in actual practice , the value most readily amenable to measurement be the cut force Af and the shear angle Aj .
these two value and the rake angle * * yc be sufficient to determine the other parameter of these relationship .
from Fig . 6 the relationship between these parameter can readily be derive and the cut force be Af where * * yl be the shear strength of the coating and be a parameter of the coating material , W be the width of the remove coating and t be its thickness .
because the rake angle Af at the tip of the knife be very much small ( or even negative ) when compare to the value of * * yc for the major portion of the knife , a very rapid increase in cut force with thickness will result .
this reduce to the relationship : Af , where Af be the intercept at zero thickness of the extrapolation of the slope indicate in eqn . ( 1 ) , Af be the thickness of the coating equivalent to the rounding off of the knife tip , Af be a straight line first approximation of this roundness , and the other symbol be equivalent to those of eqn . ( 1 ) .
a second factor which enter into the practical measurement of the instrumentally determined cutting force be the frictional resistance cause by the bottom of the knife against the substrate .
the resultant friction force , Af be thus directly proportional to Af and consequently also to film thickness .
the first two force be directly interrelated and depend upon film thickness , whereas Af be independent of these two and be a constant for a give knife / coating combination .
the basic difference between the continuous cutting mechanism and that of the chipping mechanism be that instead of shear occur in the coating ahead of the knife continuously without fracture , rupture intermittently occur along the shear plane .
in the next , the shear plane angle be high , and extend to the inclined work surface .
if the rake angle * * yc of the knife be high enough and the friction angle * * yt between the front of the knife and the back of the chip be low enough to give a positive value for Af , the resultant vector r will lie above the plane of the substrate .
if the rake angle * * yc of the knife be high enough and the friction angle * * yt between the front of the knife and the back of the chip be low enough to give a positive value for Af , the resultant vector r will lie above the plane of the substrate .
within only a few year , foamed plastic material have manage to grow into an integral , and important , phase of the plastic industry -- and the end be still not yet in sight .
yet last year 's volume probably top 100 million lb . and expectation be for a market of 275 million lb . by 1964 .
in urethane foam , for example , there have be a definite trend toward the polyether - type material ( which be now available in two - component rigid foam system ) and the emphasis be definitely on one - shot molding .
in vinyl foam , the big news be the development of technique for coat fabric with the material ( for detail , see P. 395 ) .
since the mid 1950 , when urethane foam first make its appearance in the american market , growth have be little short of fantastic .
present estimate be that production top the 100 - million - lb . mark in 1960 ( 85 to 90 million lb . for flexible , 10 or 11 million lb . for rigid ) ; ;
foam refrigerator insulation be under intensive evaluation by every major manufacturer ; ;
urethane foam be , basically , reaction product of hydroxyl - rich material and polyisocyanate ( usually tolylene diisocyanate ) .
the most important factor in determine what property the end - product will have be quite naturally the type of hydroxyl - rich compound that be use in its production .
originally , the main type use be various composition of polyester .
basically , this mean that simple processing equipment ( the mixture have good flow characteristic ) and less external heat ( the foaming reaction be exothermic and develop internal heat ) be require in one - shot foaming , although , at the same time , the problem of control the condition of one - shot foaming be critical one .
basically , this mean that simple processing equipment ( the mixture have good flow characteristic ) and less external heat ( the foaming reaction be exothermic and develop internal heat ) be require in one - shot foaming , although , at the same time , the problem of control the condition of one - shot foaming be critical one .
basically , this mean that simple processing equipment ( the mixture have good flow characteristic ) and less external heat ( the foaming reaction be exothermic and develop internal heat ) be require in one - shot foaming , although , at the same time , the problem of control the condition of one - shot foaming be critical one .
thermal conductivity be directly traceable to the material 's porous , air - cell construction which effectively trap air or a gas in the maze of minute bubble which form its composition .
where flexural strength be an important factor , be sure that your urethane foam processor be aware of it .
where flexural strength be an important factor , be sure that your urethane foam processor be aware of it .
) exceptional tensile strength be another of urethane foam 's strong feature .
Slab stock be still one of the most important form of urethane end - product in use today .
profile cut machine be available which can split foam to any desire thickness and produce sine , triangle , trapezoid , and other profile in variable height , dimension , etc . .
also available be a slitter which ` ` peel '' the inside of a fold block of foam and can be use to slit continuous sheet up to 300 yd . in length , down to 1/16 in . thick .
although slab stock appear first , it soon become apparent that for the production of cushion with irregular shape , crown contour , or rounded edge , the cutting of slab stock be a wasteful and uneconomical process .
the closed molding of flexible urethane foam have be a problem ever since the introduction of the material ( mold in open mold be more feasible ) .
the closed molding of flexible urethane foam have be a problem ever since the introduction of the material ( mold in open mold be more feasible ) .
while there be still many bug to be iron out , the technique be fast develop .
simple system be available that make it possible for urethane foam component to be pour , pump , etc . , into a void where they foam up to fill the void .
sixty lbs . loading be possible but 40 lbs . be adequate .
the run be complete when all the water have drain off into the waste line .
a reflectance - measure instrument may be desirable to measure cleaning , whereas Soxhlet extraction be necessary to measure grease removal .
a reflectance - measure instrument may be desirable to measure cleaning , whereas Soxhlet extraction be necessary to measure grease removal .
the person use these test must determine which combination of procedure be practical for any specific item in order to evaluate the dimensional change of textile fabric or garment after launder procedure commonly use in the home or commercial laundry .
temperature and time of agitation in the wash wheel be varied to obtain different degree of severity .
the wheel ( cage ) be 20 to 24 inch inside diameter and 20 to 24 inch inside length .
the water inlet be large enough to permit fill the wheel to an eight - inch level in less than two minute , and the outlet be large enough to permit discharge of this same amount of water in less than two minute .
the water inlet be large enough to permit fill the wheel to an eight - inch level in less than two minute , and the outlet be large enough to permit discharge of this same amount of water in less than two minute .
the wash wheel be the equipment prefer for the test .
each pin be individually spring to a tensione member which be drive outwardly in the slot .
the minimum diameter of the pin frame in the collapse state be 11 inch and the maximum diameter in the freely extend state ( unload ) be 14 inch .
the surface of the apparatus in contact with the test speciman be uncluttered and polished so as to be as friction - free as possible .
specimen be allow to reach moisture equilibrium with a standard atmosphere of Af and Af and then lay out without tension on a flat , polished surface , care be take that the fabric be free from wrinkle or crease .
the marked distance be parallel to the respective yarn .
the speciman of fabric be a rectangle at least 22 by 22 inch , except for cloth narrow than 22 inch , in which case the speciman be the entire width of the fabric .
the speciman of fabric be a rectangle at least 22 by 22 inch , except for cloth narrow than 22 inch , in which case the speciman be the entire width of the fabric .
the distance be at least two inch from any edge of the speciman .
each speciman be at least 25 inch by 25 inch .
place the template ( Fig . 2 ) on the fabric so that the side of the 10 inch square cut out of the template be parallel to the warp and fill for woven fabric , or the wale and course for knit fabric , and so that the same amount of fabric extend beyond the edge of the template on all side .
each speciman be approximately 16 inch square .
example of such situation be ( aerial ) night reconnaissance , the recording of radioactive tracer in live body tissue , special radiography in medical or industrial application , track recording of high energy particle , etc . .
channel - type image intensifier be capable of achieve high - gain value ; ;
the electron optical system may be either a magnetic or electrostatic one .
the magnification may be small , equal , or large than unity .
it should be note , however , that the paraxial resolution be quite similar for both electron optical system .
for the same reason , the output fiber plate be planoconcave , its expose flat side permit contact photography if a permanent record be desire .
the luminous gain of a single stage with Af ( flux gain ) be , to a first approximation , give by the product of the photocathode sensitivity S ( amp / luman ) , the anode potential v ( volt ) , and the phosphor conversion efficiency P ( lumen / watt ) .
the numerical aperture should be in general close to unity .
this condition can be satisfied , e.g. , with Af and Af or equivalent glass combination .
hence , the Af factor for the output fiber coupler be Af .
as the index of refraction of photosensitive surface of the SbCs - type lie around 2 , the Fresnel loss at the fiber - photocathode interface be about 0.5 percent and the Af factor for the interstage coupler be 0.95 .
as the index of refraction of photosensitive surface of the SbCs - type lie around 2 , the Fresnel loss at the fiber - photocathode interface be about 0.5 percent and the Af factor for the interstage coupler be 0.95 .
the internal loss be due to absorption and the small but finite loss suffer in the numerous internal reflection due to deviation from the prescribed , cylindrical fiber cross - section and minute imperfection of the core - jacket interface .
this relatively high value be probably due to the small fiber diameter increase the number of internal reflection .
the clad thickness be about 0.5 m , hence , Af and Af .
neglect absorption , the end loss of the coupling membrane and the output window Af would be 6 percent and 8 percent .
neglect absorption , the end loss of the coupling membrane and the output window Af would be 6 percent and 8 percent .
thus , the combine efficiency of the element replace by the two fiber plate ( with a combine efficiency of 0.25 ) be 0.043 or about six time less than that of the two fiber plate .
include the brightness gain Af due to the Af area demagnification , the overall gain of a fiber couple double stage image intensifi be : Af .
it be obvious that the careful choice of photocathode which maximize Af for a give input e ( in the case of the second stage , for the first phosphor screen emission ) be very important .
the input light distribution consider be P-11 and p-20 phosphor emission and the so - call ` ` night light '' ( N.L. ) as give by H.W. Babcock and J. J. Johnson .
( the p-20 input be of interest because it correspond roughly to the light emission of conventional x - ray fluorescent screen ) .
an optimal policy be one which in some sense get the good out of the process as a whole by maximize the value of the product .
the objective function be some measure of the increase in value of the stream by processing ; ;
at each step of the calculation the operating variable of only one stage need be varied .
to see how important this economy be , let we suppose that there be M operate variable at each stage and that the state be specify by N variable ; ;
this number will be of the order of Af .
if all the operating variable be varied simultaneously , Af operation would be require to do the same job , and as r increase this increase very much more rapidly than the number of operation require by the dynamic program .
no optimism be more baseless than that which believe that the high speed of modern digital computer allow for use of the crudest of method in search out a result .
` ` an optimal policy have the property that whatever the initial state and initial decision be , the remain decision must constitute an optimal policy with respect to the state result from the first decision '' .
at the same time , every device that can be employ to reduce the number of variable be of the great value , and it be one of the attractive feature of dynamic programming that room be leave for ingenuity in use the special feature of the problem to this end .
the set of vector Af constitute the operate policy or , more briefly , the policy , and a policy be admissible if all the Af belong to S .
the set of vector Af constitute the operate policy or , more briefly , the policy , and a policy be admissible if all the Af belong to S .
the objective function , which be to be maximize , be some function , usually piecewise continuous , of the product state .
an optimal policy be an admissible policy Af which maximize the objective function p .
the policy may not be unique but the maximum value of p certainly be , and once the policy be specify this maximum can be calculate by ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) as a function of the feed state Af .
the policy may not be unique but the maximum value of p certainly be , and once the policy be specify this maximum can be calculate by ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) as a function of the feed state Af .
let Af where the maximization be over all admissible policy Af .
when it be necessary to be specific we say that the optimal policy be an optimal r - stage policy with respect to the feed state Af .
thus Af where the maximization be over all admissible policy Af , and Af be relate to Af by ( 5 ) .
the set of equation ( 5 ) , ( 6 ) , and the starting equation ( 7 ) be of a recursive type well suit to program on the digital computer .
the set of equation ( 5 ) , ( 6 ) , and the starting equation ( 7 ) be of a recursive type well suit to program on the digital computer .
we also see how the result may be present , although if n , the number of state variable , be large any tabulation will become cumbersome .
the process in which the outcome of any one stage be know only statistically be also of interest , although for chemical reactor design it be not as important as the deterministic process .
this be specify by a distribution function Af such that the probability that Af lie in some region d of the stage space be Af .
for a single stage we may define Af where the maximization be by choice of Af .
if we consider a process in which the outcome of one stage be know before passage to the next , then the principle of optimality show that the policy in subsequent stage should be optimal with respect to the outcome of the first .
the type of presentation of result use in the deterministic process may be use here , except that now the fourth column be redundant .
the discussion of the optimal policy when the outcome of one stage be not know before pass to the next be a very much more difficult matter .
a gyro - stabilize platform system , use restrained gyro , be well suited for automatic leveling because of the characteristic of the gyro - platform - servo combination .
the platform angle * * yf be the angle about which the gyro be control .
if the polarity be correct , the platform rotate in such a direction as to reduce the accelerometer output to zero .
finally , when the accelerometer output be zero , the entire system remain stationary , and the platform be , by definition , level .
finally , when the accelerometer output be zero , the entire system remain stationary , and the platform be , by definition , level .
the platform be initially off level by the angle Aj .
the angle generate by the platform servo * * yf multiply by G be the effective acceleration act on the accelerometer .
the system as indicate in Fig . 7 - 2 be fundamental and simple because the transient effect of both the platform servo and the accelerometer have be neglect .
in this type of system , a high loop gain be desirable because it provide a fast response time .
the time require for the system to reach a level position be approximately inversely proportional to the servo loop gain .
in addition , the cutoff frequency for input acceleration be approximately proportional to the servo loop gain ; ;
the equation relate input acceleration to output platform angle be Af .
one solution to the problem be to operate with a low loop gain and to include low - pass filter .
the amplifier be design so that its gain be large for accelerometer signal above a certain threshold level .
the effect be that the platform return from an off - level position at a rapid rate until it be nearly level , at which point the platform be control by a proportional servo with low enough frequency response so that the noise have little effect on the leveling process .
when the system be on automatic leveling , the gyro drift be cancel by the output of the leveling system ( amplifier Af ) .
the automatic leveling system describe in this section be readily adaptable to a gyro - stabilize platform consist of three integrate gyro .
a useful by - product of this system be that the information necessary to set the gyro drift bias be available from the current necessary to hold the system in level .
the leveling process can be accomplish manually , and the result be as satisfactory as those obtain with automatic equipment .
the process consist in turn the platform manually until the output of both accelerometer be zero .
manual leveling be inconvenient if the platform must be maintain accurately level for any prolonged period of time .
this process be especially difficult since gyro drift be typically random .
this process be especially difficult since gyro drift be typically random .
for purely inertial navigator , two technique be available to accomplish the platform head : use of external or surveying equipment to establish proper heading ; ;
the choice of the heading technique be dependent upon the accuracy requirement , field condition , and the time available to accomplish the heading .
a mirror be mount on each accelerometer so that the plane of the mirror be perpendicular to the sensitive axis of the unit .
with the transit set up , a mirror on one of the accelerometer be sighted and the platform be turn until it be align .
although this technique be simple and satisfactory , one practical difficulty do exist : the direction of true north must be know for each launch point .
however , this difficulty be not too serious if it be realize that a surveying team can establish a true north base line with a few day ' work .
if the platform be not too high off the ground , a transit can be mount on a stand to raise it up to the platform .
if the polarity be correct , the platform will turn until the head error angle be zero .
if the polarity be correct , the platform will turn until the head error angle be zero .
information be also available from this autocollimator system to set the drift bias for the z - axis gyro .
if the drift error be systematic , it can be cancel with a bias circuit which can be arrange and adjust to supply the require compensating current .
Gyrocompass alignment be an automatic heading system which depend upon the characteristic of one gyro to establish true heading .
for the case of a purely inertial autonavigator consist of three restrained gyro , a coordinate system be use where the sensitive axis of the x accelerometer be parallel to the east - west direction at the base point , and the Y accelerometer sensitive axis be parallel to the north - south direction at the base point .
for the case of a purely inertial autonavigator consist of three restrained gyro , a coordinate system be use where the sensitive axis of the x accelerometer be parallel to the east - west direction at the base point , and the Y accelerometer sensitive axis be parallel to the north - south direction at the base point .
the input axis of the appropriate gyro be parallel to the sensitive direction of the accelerometer .
the platform be level and properly head , so that the x - gyro input axis be parallel to the east - west direction and the Y - gyro input axis be parallel to the north - south direction .
the platform be level and properly head , so that the x - gyro input axis be parallel to the east - west direction and the Y - gyro input axis be parallel to the north - south direction .
the input axis of the x gyro , when point in the east - west direction , be always perpendicular to the spin axis of earth .
the point be at a latitude * * yl , and the platform be at an error in head east .
the point be at a latitude * * yl , and the platform be at an error in head east .
when the platform be level , * * ye be a rotation about the z axis of the platform Af .
