An argument comprised of the five parts is, then, the most complete, but its use is not always necessary. There is a time when the Résumé should be dispensed with — if the matter is brief enough to be readily embraced by the memory. There is a situation, too, in which the Embellishment should be omitted — if the matter proves to be too meagre for amplification and adornment. And if the argument is brief and the matter also slight or insignificant, then both the Embellishment and the Résumé should be left out. This rule which I have just set forth is to be observed for the last two parts in every argument.​99 The fullest argument, therefore, is fivefold, the briefest threefold, and the mean fourfold, lacking either the Embellishment or the Résumé.
20 31 Defective arguments​100 are of two kinds: one can be refuted​101 by the adversary, and so belongs to the cause proper; the other, although likewise invalid, does not need to be refuted. If I do not add examples, you will be unable clearly to distinguish those arguments which it is proper to refute in rebuttal, and those which it is proper to ignore in disdain­ful silence and to abstain from refuting. This knowledge of defective arguments will confer a double advantage. It will warn us to avoid a fault in arguing, and teach us skilfully to reprehend a fault not avoided by others.
Since, then, I have shown that a perfect and full argument consists of five parts,​102 let us consider the  p115 faults to be avoided in each single part of the argument, so that we may ourselves be able to shun these faults, and by the following rules test the argument of our adversaries in all its parts and undermine it in some one of these.
32 The Proposition is defective when an assertion based on some one part or on a majority of individuals, but not necessarily applicable to all, is referred to all, as if one should argue as follows: "All the poor would rather do wrong and acquire riches than do right and remain poor." If a speaker has presented this sort of Proposition in an argument, without caring to ask of what nature the Reason or the Proof of the Reason is to be, we shall easily refute his Proposition by showing that what is true of one dishonest poor man is being falsely and unjustly applied to all the poor.103
33 Again, the Proposition is defective when a rare occurrence is declared to be absolutely impossible, as follows: "No one can fall in love at a single glance, or as he is passing by."​104 For inasmuch as some have fallen in love at first sight, and yet the speaker has said "no one," it is of no significance whatsoever that the experience occurs but rarely, provided we understand that it sometimes does occur, or even only that it can occur.
21 Again, the Proposition is defective when we submit that we have made a complete enumeration of the possibilities and pass by some pertinent one,​105 as follows: "Since, then, it is established that the man was killed, he must have been killed by robbers, or by enemies, or by you, whom in his will he made  p117 part-heir. In that place robbers have never been seen. He had no enemy. If he was not killed by robbers, of whom there were none, nor by enemies, of whom he had none, it remains that he was slain by you." We shall refute a Proposition of this type by showing that others besides those whom the speaker has enumerated could have undertaken the crime.​106 Here, for example, when he has said that the murder must have been committed by robbers, or by enemies, or by us, we shall say that it could have been committed by the man's slaves or by our co‑heirs. When we have in this way upset the enumeration made by our accusers, we have left ourselves wider room for defence. This then is another mistake always to be avoided in the Proposition — the omission of some pertinent item when we think that we have included all.
34 Again, the Proposition is defective if it is based on a false enumeration and we present fewer possibilities than there are in reality, as follows: "There are two things, men of the jury, which ever impel men to crime: luxury and greed."​107 "But what about love?," some one will say, "ambition,​108 superstition, the fear of death,​109 the passion for power, and, in short,  p119 the great multitude of other motives?" Again the enumeration is false when the possibilities are fewer than we present, as follows: "There are three emotions that agitate all men: fear, desire, and worry." Indeed it had been enough to say fear and desire, since worry is necessarily conjoined with both.
22 Again, the Proposition is defective if it traces things too far back, as follows: "Stupidity is the mother and matter of all evils. She gives birth to boundless desires. Furthermore, boundless desires have neither end nor limit. They breed avarice. Avarice, further, drives men to any crime you will. Thus it is avarice which has led our adversaries to take this crime upon themselves."​110 Here what was said last was enough for a Proposition, lest we copy Ennius and the other poets, who are licensed to speak as follows: "O that in Pelion's woods the firwood timbers had not fallen to the ground, cut down by axes, and that therefrom had not commenced the undertaking to begin the ship which now is named with the name of Argo, because in it sailed the picked Argive heroes who were seeking the golden fleece of the ram from the Colchians, with guile, at King Pelias' command. For then never would my mistress, misled, have set foot away from home."​111 Indeed here  p121 it were adequate, if poets had a care for mere adequacy, to say: "Would that my misled mistress had not set foot away from home." In the Proposition, then, we must also carefully guard against this tracing of things back to their remotest origin; for the Proposition does not, like many others, need to be refuted, but is on its own account defective.112
23 35 The Reason is defective if it is inappropriate to the Proposition because either weak or groundless. It is weak when it does not conclusively demonstrate the correctness of the Proposition, as in Plautus: "To reprove a friend for a fault that deserves reproof is a thankless task, but in season useful and profitable." That is the Proposition. Let us see what Reason is presented: "For​113 today I shall severely reprove my friend for a fault that much deserves reproof." His reckoning of what is useful is based on what he himself is about to do, and not on what it is proper to do. A Reason is groundless when it rests on a false supposition, as follows: "One must not flee from love, for it engenders the truest friendship."​114 Or as follows: "One must spurn philosophy, for it  p123 produces inactivity and sloth."​115 If all these Reasons were not false, we should also be obliged to admit the truth of their Propositions.
36 Again, a Reason is weak if the causal basis which it submits for the Proposition is not a compelling one. For example, Pacuvius: "The goddess Fortune is mad, blind, and stupid, some philosophers maintain. They declare that she stands upon a revolving globe of stone;​116 whither Chance impels the stone, thither, they say, does Fortune fall. She is blind, they repeat, for that she fails wholly to perceive whereto she attaches herself. Moreover they declare that she is mad because she is cruel, uncertain, and inconstant; stupid because she knows not how to tell worthy from unworthy. But there are other philosophers who, on the contrary, deny that in our wretched life there any such thing as Fortune; there is, they say, Blind Accident. That this is more like the truth, is proved by the actual experience of life; even as Orestes now was king, and now became a beggar. Surely by the shipwreck of his property was this brought to pass, and did not befall by Chance or Fortune."​117 Pacuvius here uses a weak Reason when they say that it is truer to ascribe the guidance of events to Accident rather than to Fortune, for whichever of these philosophical theories  p125 you hold, it could have happened that one who had been a king became a beggar.
24 37 Again, a Reason is weak when it appears to be presented as the Reason, but says precisely the same as was said in the Proposition,​118 as follows: "A great evil to mankind is greed, for the reason that men wrestle with great and many ills on account of the boundless passion for money." Here the reason merely repeats in other words what has been said in the Proposition.
Again, a Reason is weak if the causal basis which it submits for the Proposition is inadequate to the demands of the subject,​119 as follows: "Wisdom is useful because the wise have been in the habit of cultivating a sense of duty." Or, "It is useful to have true friends, for thus you may have persons with whom you can jest." In Reasons of this kind the Proposition is supported not by a universal or absolute reason, but by a feeble one.
Again, the Reason is weak if it can at choice be applied to another Proposition,​120 as in the case of Pacuvius, who presents the same reason for calling Fortune blind as for calling her stupid.121
38 In the Proof of the Reason, there are many faults to be avoided in our discourse and also to be watched for in that of our adversaries. These must be considered the more carefully because an accurate Proof of the Reason supplies the most cogent support of the whole argument.
 p127 Students in the rhetorical schools, therefore, in Proving the Reason, use a Dilemma,​122 as follows: "You treat me, father, with undeserved wrong. For if you think Cresphontes wicked, why did you give me to him for wife? But if he is honourable, why do you force me to leave such a one against his will and mine?" Such a Dilemma will either be reversed against the user, or be rebutted in a single term.​123 Reversed, as follows: "My daughter, I do not treat you with any undeserved wrong. If he is honourable, I have given him you in marriage; but if he is wicked, I shall by divorce free you from your ills." It will be a rebuttal in a single term if one or the other alternative is confuted, as follows: "You say: 'For if you think Cresphontes wicked, why did you give me to him for wife?' I thought him honourable. I erred. Too late I came to know him, and knowing him, I fly from him."​124 25 39 Thus the rebuttal of a dilemma of this type is twofold: the first fuller, the second easier to invent.
 p129 Again, the Proof of the Reason is faulty when we misapply a sign designating a variety of things in such a way as to indicate specifically a single thing,​125 as follows: "Since he is pale, he must have been sick," or: "She must have become a mother, since she is holding a baby boy in her arms."​126 These indications do not of themselves offer definite proof, but if there is concurrence of other like indications, such signs increase probability not a little.
Again, there is a fault when that which is directed against the adversary can as well fit some one else or the speaker himself,​127 as follows: "Wretched are they who marry wives." "Yet you have married a second."128
Again, that is faulty which presents a banal defence, as follows: "He was led into crime by anger — or youth — or love."​129 For if excuses of this sort are admitted, the greatest crimes will escape unpunished.
Again it is a fault to assume as certain, on the ground that "it is universally agreed upon," a thing which is still in dispute, as follows: "Ho! Look you, the gods who guide the movements of the beings that dwell above and below keep peace among themselves  p131 and join in concord."​130 Thus Thesprotus, as Ennius has presented him, uses this example on his own authority, as though he had already demonstrated the fact by reasons sufficiently conclusive.
40 Again, that is faulty which appears to be pronounced too late, as it were, and after the matter has been concluded,​131 as follows: "If it had entered my mind, fellow-citizens, I should not have been guilty of allowing the matter to come to such a pass, for I should have done this or that; but at the time this thought escaped me."
Again, there is a fault when that which stands as a manifest transgression is yet cloaked by some defence,​132 as follows: "When all men were seeking you out and you had a most prosperous kingdom, I forsook you; now that all have deserted you, I, alone, in greatest peril, prepare to restore you."133
26 Again, that is faulty which can be taken in another sense than the speaker intended;​134 for example, if some influential demagogue should in a speech before the Assembly say: "It is better to submit to kings than to bad laws." In fact, these words, though they may be uttered by way of amplification without sinister intent, are nevertheless because of the speaker's influence sure to breed a terrible suspicion.
41 Again, it is a fault to use false or general definitions;​135 false, as if one should say that there is no  p133 injury except in the form of battery or of insulting language;​136 general, like that which can be equally well applied to something else, as if one should say: "An informer, in short, is worthy of death; for he is a wicked and dangerous citizen." The speaker has offered a definition no more appropriate to an informer than to a thief, assassin, or traitor.
Again, it is a fault to advance proof what has been put in question,​137 as if one should charge another with theft, and accordingly declare that he is a wicked, greedy, and deceit­ful man — and the evidence for this is that he has stolen from the speaker.138
Again, it is a fault to refute one disputed point by another disputed point,​139 as follows: "You should not be satisfied, Censors, when this defendant says that he was unable to be present as he had sworn he would be. I ask, would he have given this same excuse to the tribe of the soldiers if he had failed to appear for military duty?" This is faulty because a matter not clearly settled or adjudged, but entangled with difficulties and based on a like point of dispute is cited as an example.
42 Again, a fault is present when a matter about which there is the sharpest controversy is not clearly settled and is allowed to pass as though it were agreed upon, as follows: "Plainly speaks the oracle's response if you would understand. He commands that the arms be given to a warrior such as was he who bore them, should we be zealous to take Pergamum. This warrior I profess to be. It is but fair  p135 that I have the use of my cousin's arms and that they be awarded me, either because I am his kin or, if you will, because I rival him in valour."140
Again, it is a fault to be inconsistent with oneself in one's own discourse and to contradict what one has said before, as follows: "On what ground shall I impeach him?", and then to develop this thought by the following reflection: "For if he has a conscience, why should you impeach an honourable man? But if he has a shameless character, to what avail then would you impeach one who, when he has heard the charge, deems it of little account?" 27 He seems to have provided himself with a sound enough reason for not making the accusation. What does he say next? "Now at last I will finish you off from the very first thread."141
43 Again, that is faulty which is said against the convictions of the judge or the audience​142 — if the party to which they are devoted, or men whom they hold dear, should be attacked, or the sentiments of the hearer outraged by some fault of this kind.
Again, it is a fault not to prove everything which in the Proposition you have promised to prove.143
Again, one must beware of talking on a different subject from the one in dispute​144 — and in regard to this kind of fault one must take care not to add anything to, or omit anything from, the subject, and not to change the question at issue and turn to quite  p137 another; like the case of Zethus and Amphion in Pacuvius — their controversy, begun on the subject of music, ends in a disputation on the theory of wisdom and the utility of virtue.145
Again, care must be taken that the prosecutor's charge shall not bear on one point, and the Exculpation of the defence on another. Many speakers on the side of the defence are often intentionally guilty of this irrelevance when pressed by the difficulties of their cause; for example, if a man accused of having sought a magistracy by bribery should say that in the army he had often received military gifts from generals. If we carefully watch for this fault in the speech of our adversaries we shall often detect that they have nothing to say to the point.
44 Again, it is a fault to disparage an art or science or any occupation because of the faults of those engaged in it,​146 as in the case of those who blame rhetoric because of the blameworthy life of some orator.147
Again, it is a fault, when you establish that a crime was committed, to believe you are thereby proving that it was committed by a specific person, as follows: "It is established that the corpse was disfigured, swollen, and discoloured; therefore the man was killed by poison." Then, if the speaker concentrates,  p139 as many do, on proving that poison was administered, he will be harassed by a not insignificant fault. The question is not whether the crime was committed, but who committed it.
28 45 Again, it is a fault in making a comparison to bring out one term and either suppress mention of the other, or treat it rather cursorily;​148 for example, if in deciding by a comparison whether it is better for the populace to receive, or not to receive, wheat, the speaker should on the one hand really take care to enumerate the benefits, but on the other should pass over the disadvantages and whatever he wishes to suppress, or should mention only those disadvantages which are least serious.149
Again, it is a fault in making a comparison to think it necessary to disparage one thing when you praise the other;​150 for example, if the question should arise, who are to be held in greater honour for services to the Roman republic, the Albensians or the Pinnensian Vestini,​151 and the speaker should attack one or the other. Indeed it is not necessary, if you prefer one, to disparage the other; for you can manage, when you have given greater praise to one, to allot some portion of praise to the other, so that you may not be thought to have combated the truth under influence of partiality.
 p141 Again, it is a fault to build upon a name or appellation a dispute which usage can best decide.​152 For example, Sulpicius​153 had opposed his veto to the recall of the exiles who had not been permitted to plead their cause; later he changed his mind, and proposing the same law, said he was offering a different proposal, because he had changed the name. For, he said, he was recalling not "exiles," but "those ejected by violence" — as though the dispute concerned the name by which to call those people, or as though all to whom water and fire have been formally forbidden are not called exiles. True, we perhaps excuse Sulpicius if he had a reason for doing this.​154 Yet let us understand that it is a fault to raise a controversy on account of a change in names.
29 46 Since Embellishment consists of similes, examples, amplifications, previous judgements, and the other means which serve to expand and enrich the argument, let us consider the faults which attach to these.
 p143 A Simile is defective if it is inexact in any aspect, and lacks a proper ground for the comparison, or is prejudicial to him who presents it.155
An Example is defective if it is either false, and hence refutable, or base, and hence not to be imitated, or if it implies more or less than the matter demands.156
The citing of a Previous Judgement will be faulty​157 if the judgement applies to an unlike matter, or one not in dispute, or if it is discreditable, or is of such a kind that previous decisions either in greater number or of greater appropriateness can be offered by our adversaries.
Again, it is a fault, when our adversaries admit a fact, to devote an argument to establishing it as a fact;​158 for it should rather be amplified.
Again, it is a fault to amplify what one should prove;​159 for example, if a man should charge another with homicide, and before he has presented conclusive arguments, should amplify the crime, avowing that there is nothing more shameful than homicide. The question is, in fact, not whether the deed is or is not shameful, but whether it was committed.
The Résumé is defective if it does not include every point in the exact order in which it has been presented; if it does not come to a conclusion briefly;​160 and if the summary does not leave something precise and stable, so as to make clear what the Proposition  p145 was, then what has been established by the Reason, by the Proof of the Reason, and by the argument as a whole.

Five Parts of a Complete Argument:
Define <P> to be a part of a complete argument called a Proposition through which we set forth summarily what we intend to prove.
Define <R> to be a part of a complete argument called Reason which sets forth the causal basis for <P> establishing the truth of what we are urging.
Define <PR> to be a part of a complete argument called a Proof of Reason which corroborates, by means of additional arguments, the briefly presented Reason.

Defective Arguments:
Define <G> to be a defective argument type called Generalization where the <P> is an assertion based on some one part or on a majority of individuals, but not necessarily applicable to all, is referred to all.
Define <FE> to be a defective argument type called Incomplete Enumeration where the <P> is defective when we claim to have made a complete enumeration of the possibilities, but actually miss out on some pertinent ones.
Define <IR> to be a defective argument type called Inconclusive Reason where <R> does not conclusively demonstrate the correctness of the <P>.
Define <WCB> to be a defective argument type called Insufficient Causal Basis where a <R> is weak if the causal basis which it submits for the <P> is not a compelling one.
Define <RR> to be a defective argument type called Faulty Repetition of Proposition where a <R> is weak when it appears to be presented as the <R>, but says precisely the same as was said in the <P>.
Define <FU> to be a defective argument type called Presumptuous Consensus where a <PR> is assumed as certain, on the ground that "it is universally agreed upon," a thing which is still in dispute.
Define <DEP> to be a defective argument type called Ambiguous Language Use in which a <PR> can be taken in another sense than the speaker intended.

Let <s> be some string. Define <IDA> to be the task of classifying <s> as of type <G>, <FE>, <IR>, <RR>, <WCB>, <FU> or <DEP> 
Let <t> be some advanced task. Define <D> to be the decomposition of <t> into specific steps.
Define <IDAA> to be the application of <D> to <IDA>. Take it step by step.