Define <G> to be a defective argument type called Generalization usually claiming a general truth based on a specific instance (e.g., ""All sports car drivers are too aggressive!" is an example of:", "Even though it's only the first day, I can tell this is going to be a boring course.", "It is warmer this year in Las Vegas as compared to last year; therefore, global warming is rapidly accelerating.", "If we allow Susan to leave early, soon we'll be giving everyone Friday afternoon off.", "All of those who hate the Duterte administration are CPP-NPA supporters.")
Define <FE> to be a defective argument type called False Enumeration usually listing fewer or more options than actually exist (e.g., ""Vote for Smith or live through four more years of higher taxes."", "America: Love it or leave it", "You are either with God or against him.", "Sukaina to her mom: Either you buy me this new book, or you decide that reading is not important at all.", "If you don't say the pledge of allegiance, then you must be a traitor.")
Define <IR> to be a defective argument type called Inappropriate Reason usually providing a reason that doesn't logically support the proposition (e.g., "Don't you want the best for your baby?", "Radio talk show host, on learning that an association of critical thinking professors had suggested his show as a source of fallacious reasoning: “Who are these people? They talk to maybe 30 people at a time. I talk to 5 million people every day. They could not begin to do what I do. They are just gnats flying around getting in the way.”", "Your honor, while my son may have made a bad decision that night while under the influence of alcohol, it shouldn't affect the rest of his life. It was just one mistake. He's on the varsity swim team.", "We should give the other applicant the job because he has a poor family and he needs to provide for them. It looks like he suffers a lot!", "What can our new math teacher know? Have you seen how fat she is?")
Define <RR> to be a defective argument type called Redundant Reason usually saying the same thing as the proposition but in other words (e.g., "This legislation is sinful because it is the wrong thing to do.", "smoking cigarettes is deadly because cigarettes can kill you", "all bachelors are unmarried males", "Speaker 1: You should trust the Bible because it’s the Word of God.
Speaker 2: How do you know it’s the Word of God?
Speaker 1: Because God tells us it is.
Speaker 2: Where does God tell us this?
Speaker 1: Right here, in the Bible.", "Shakira is the best singer in the world because she is the most talented singer there is.")
Define <WCB> to be a defective argument type called Weak Causal Basis usually offering a reason that is not compelling enough to support the proposition (e.g., "I had a real bad headache, then saw my doctor.  Just by talking with him, my headache started to subside, and I was all better the next day.  It was well worth the $200 visit fee.", "Every girl I've dated has been a nurse. I must only be compatible with nurses!", "Since Anna Camacho became vice president of the parent-teacher association, student performance has declined and teacher morale is down. We on the school board believe that Camacho bears sole responsibility for the downtrend.", "Global chocolate consumption is highest in Switzerland, yet people there are among the trimmest in the industrialized world. Therefore, it’s reasonable to conclude that chocolate helps keep your weight down.", "Which logical reason supports the opposition to the motion "Cell phones give off an unsafe radiation and should not be used."")
Define <FU> to be a defective argument type called False Universals usually asserting universally agreed points without proof (e.g., "Mormonism is one of the fastest growing sects of Christianity today so that whole story about Joseph Smith getting the golden plates that, unfortunately, disappeared back into heaven, must be true!", "Stating that something should be done (or agreed to) because everyone else thinks this way.", "“[Everyone else is buying it, so you should too!]”", "You appealed to popularity or the fact that many people do something as an attempted form of validation.", "SM 7: No global warming happening", "Everybody know that staying out in the rain can make you sick. Which logical fallacy is represented here?", "All my friends are doing a low carb diet. That must be the only way to lose weight so I will do it too.", "Everybody else is doing it, why don't you?", "See the movie that everybody's talking about", "If everyone believes it, you should too!")
Define <DEP> to be a defective argument type called Double-Edged Phrases usually using statements open to dual interpretations, potentially against the speaker (e.g., "I want to have myself a merry little Christmas, but I refuse to do as the song suggests and make the yuletide gay.  I don't think sexual preference should have anything to do with enjoying the holiday.", "The officer told me to freeze but it was too hot out to be freezing, so I was justified in running away.", "Why does the law state that you have to be 21 years old to drink?  Does it really make any difference if you are 20 years and 364 days old?  That is absurd.  Therefore, if a single day makes no difference, then a collection of 1095 single days won’t make any difference. Therefore, changing the drinking age to 18 will not make any difference.", "The police said they suspect several people of setting the fire. Therefore, I can't be under suspicion because I was alone all night.", "Science shows us that improved quality of life comes through research and invention.")

Let <s> be some string. Define <IDA> to be the task of identifying the type of defective argument <s> has.
Let <t> be some advanced task. Define <D> to be the decomposition of <t> into specific steps.
Define <IDAA> to be the application of <D> to <IDA>.
