Define <G> to be a defective argument type called Generalization usually claiming a general truth based on a specific instance (e.g., ""All sports car drivers are too aggressive!" is an example of:", "Three kids in one class failed the Jane Eyre quiz, I guess,all the other classes will all fail it, too.", "Even though it's only the first day, I can tell this is going to be a boring course.")
Define <FE> to be a defective argument type called False Enumeration usually listing fewer or more options than actually exist (e.g., ""Vote for Smith or live through four more years of higher taxes."", "I thought you were a good person, but you weren’t in class today.", "America: Love it or leave it")
Define <IR> to be a defective argument type called Inappropriate Reason usually providing a reason that doesn't logically support the proposition (e.g., "Don't you want the best for your baby?", "In the four years that I have been marketing my new and improved brand of past-life regressive biocognitive astral-projective hyperaffective-hypnotic-teleological-metatherapy (buy ten sessions and the next one is free!), not one person has proved it is worthless or that I am unethical for providing a therapy I just made up one day when I realized that no one was referring clients to me anymore. That makes clear what a worthwhile therapy this is and how exceptionally ethical I am to provide it.", "Radio talk show host, on learning that an association of critical thinking professors had suggested his show as a source of fallacious reasoning: “Who are these people? They talk to maybe 30 people at a time. I talk to 5 million people every day. They could not begin to do what I do. They are just gnats flying around getting in the way.”", "Your honor, while my son may have made a bad decision that night while under the influence of alcohol, it shouldn't affect the rest of his life. It was just one mistake. He's on the varsity swim team.")
Define <RR> to be a defective argument type called Redundant Reason usually saying the same thing as the proposition but in other words (e.g., "This legislation is sinful because it is the wrong thing to do.", "That restaurant is popular because everyone in town goes there.", "smoking cigarettes is deadly because cigarettes can kill you")
Define <WCB> to be a defective argument type called Weak Causal Basis usually offering a reason that is not compelling enough to support the proposition (e.g., "I had a real bad headache, then saw my doctor.  Just by talking with him, my headache started to subside, and I was all better the next day.  It was well worth the $200 visit fee.", "Every day, I eat cereal for breakfast. One time, I had a muffin instead, and there was a major earthquake in my city. I've eaten cereal ever since.", "Every girl I've dated has been a nurse. I must only be compatible with nurses!", "Since Anna Camacho became vice president of the parent-teacher association, student performance has declined and teacher morale is down. We on the school board believe that Camacho bears sole responsibility for the downtrend.")
Define <FU> to be a defective argument type called False Universals usually asserting universally agreed points without proof (e.g., "Mormonism is one of the fastest growing sects of Christianity today so that whole story about Joseph Smith getting the golden plates that, unfortunately, disappeared back into heaven, must be true!", "Stating that something should be done (or agreed to) because everyone else thinks this way.", "“[Everyone else is buying it, so you should too!]”", "You appealed to popularity or the fact that many people do something as an attempted form of validation.", "SM 7: No global warming happening", "Everybody know that staying out in the rain can make you sick.
Which logical fallacy is represented here?", "“Everyone else is doing it, so should you”.", "All my friends are doing a low carb diet. That must be the only way to lose weight so I will do it too.")
Define <DEP> to be a defective argument type called Double-Edged Phrases usually using statements open to dual interpretations, potentially against the speaker (e.g., "I want to have myself a merry little Christmas, but I refuse to do as the song suggests and make the yuletide gay.  I don't think sexual preference should have anything to do with enjoying the holiday.", "It is immoral to kill an innocent human being.  Fetuses are innocent human  beings.  Therefore, it is immoral to kill fetuses.", "The officer told me to freeze but it was too hot out to be freezing, so I was justified in running away.")

Let <s> be some string. Define <IDA> to be the task of identifying the type of defective argument <s> has.
Let <t> be some advanced task. Define <D> to be the decomposition of <t> into specific steps.
Define <IDAA> to be the application of <D> to <IDA>.
